The Timp series from Altra has always sat in an interesting space. A longer trail running shoe with a moderate-to-high stack height that wasn't as max as the Olympus or as traditional as the Lone Peak. A weight that definitely steered it to longer rather than any uptempo efforts further added to that. Billed as a trail shoe that could handle any surface, it lacked the versatility to move quicker over those long miles. Version 5 comes in almost an ounce lighter to fill that gap. The same versatile longer-distance trail shoe now comes with a sub 10 oz weight and a Vibram outsole, providing security and nimbleness that almost makes for a brand-new ride.
Altra Timp 5 Price: $154.95 at Running Warehouse
Weight: 9.8 oz, 277 g (men's size 9), 8.6 oz, 243 g (women's size 8)
Stack Height: 29 mm / 29 mm
Drop: 0 mm
Classification: Trail Running Shoe

RUNNING SHOE SUMMARY

The Altra Timp 5 is a versatile, longer-distance trail shoe for those who want a wider, anatomic fit over a variety of technical terrain. A slightly firmer EGO MAX midsole provides plenty of cushioning with a touch of responsiveness underfoot. The Vibram outsole, lugs and flex grooves provide an adaptable grip to a variety of softer surfaces. The upper is standard for Altra with a wider toe box and slightly wider fit while maintaining a secure midfoot. A unique velcro strap at the back provides the ability to secure gaiters for muddy terrain, adding another layer of versatility. An anatomic, cushioned zero drop trail shoe for longer miles, the Timp 5 returns lighter (by almost an ounce) and ready to take on almost anything on softer surfaces.

SIMILAR SHOES: Topo Ultraventure 3

FIT

The Altra Timp 5 fits me slightly long in my normal men's US size 10. The fit is on the wider side throughout the length of the shoe but especially in the forefoot. As expected with Altra, the forefoot is wider and anatomic. The volume is fairly normal. The laces do stop prematurely and I did experience some creasing along the top of the toes. This did cause slightly uncomfortable pressure over the top of my foot which has improved as the upper broke in. The midfoot fits slightly wide-to-normal. The tongue is gusseted, moderately thick and the laces stay secured easily. I did not have to lace lock this shode despite having a little more width. The heel features a flexible heel counter and a decent amount of cushioning around the collar. I had no issues with the counter and even those with sensitivities should be fine. The security was quite good once I got the laces tied down despite the wider fit. This will still work best for those with normal-to-slightly wider feet, while those with narrow feet may struggle a bit. The upper mesh is tough with a strong toe guard. This makes the internal aspect of the upper a little scratchy, so socks are definitely recommended with this shoe.

PERFORMANCE

The Altra Timp 5 is a varied terrain long-distance trail running shoe. The 29mm, zero drop midsole features full-length EGO MAX. Although billed as soft, the actually feel underfoot is slightly firm with a little bit of bounce. It feels consistent regardless of the mileage you have run on it and the slight firmness gives it a touch of responsiveness. The 9.8 oz weight (men's size 9) is a welcome change from the prior version. This makes it feel more nimble on foot, which is helpful with climbing and foot work on unsteady terrain. The zero drop is noticeable and the heel does feel quite low. Fortunately, when the forefoot flex grooves finally break in (which take 10-15 miles), the early forefoot rocker combined with the flexibility takes the edge off the zero drop heel. The heel is beveled slightly with a small trail rudder. This makes for a solid and fairly normal heel transition upon landing. Going through the midfoot and forefoot initially provide a stiff transition. As the shoe fit me slightly long, I felt like it was extremely stiff at first (which made the zero drop more noticeable). As my foot swelled a tiny bit over longer miles and the shoe broke in, this feeling went away. Once this is broken in, as mentioned the forefoot transitions well and seems to adapt decently to varied terrain. There is no rock plate (to my knowledge) but the thicker midsole has been protective enough I have not had any issues with rocks.

Purpose-wise, the Altra Timp 5 is best for longer trail efforts. The lighter weight does make it more nimble but the slightly longer fit and midsole make it feel better over longer consistent efforts. I could see this being an ultramarathon race shoe for many people, although I personally would need a bit more heel drop. It handles a variety of surfaces quite well thanks to the Vibram outsole that has great grip. I have used this on wet dirt, dry dirt, gravel and some mild mud without issue. The lugs grip especially well on long climbs and have even tolerated some road use (although I would not suggest that extensively). After 20 miles of use (including some road) the outsole has remained intact with no noticeable wear. Thus, with the midsole consistency, I would expect this shoe to last for a long time.

STABILITY

The Altra Timp 5 is a neutral shoe without any traditional means of stability. However, there are a few subtle methods that provide some mild guidance. The wider width of the forefoot adds inherent stability to the front of the shoe. The small midfoot sidewalls on the medial and lateral sides also provide mild guidance. The forefoot flex grooves, once broken in, combined with the slightly early forefoot rocker also provide some forward guidance. Outside of those mild things, this is a fairly neutral shoe that will not interfere too much with your mechanics.

Thoughts as a DPT: Sizing Choice in Long Distance Trail Shoes
By Matthew Klein

Sizing in a trail shoe can be challenging. On one hand, extra length is good to deal with the natural sliding that can occur with traversing steep downhills and the normal foot swelling that can occur with the longer on foot times associated with trail running. On the other hand, a more true to size fit can provide more security and your foot mechanics are more likely to line up with the geometry/flex grooves of the shoe, especially in the forefoot. In the case of the Altra Timp 5, I noticed the slightly long fit immediately. It made the forefoot feel extra stiff due to hitting the front just slightly off from where the flex grooves were. This did break in with time and would always felt better the longer I ran due normal foot volume changes with increased running time. However, I tend to prefer shoes to fit true to size and close, so this an adjustment. Sizing in a trail shoe can be challenging. On one hand, extra length is good to deal with the natural sliding that can occur with traversing steep downhills and the normal foot swelling that can occur with the longer on foot times associated with trail running. On the other hand, a more true to size fit can provide more security and your foot mechanics are more likely to line up with the geometry/flex grooves of the shoe, especially in the forefoot. In the case of the Altra Timp 5, I noticed the slightly long fit immediately. It made the forefoot feel extra stiff due to hitting the front just slightly off from where the flex grooves were. This did break in with time and would always felt better the longer I ran due normal foot volume changes with increased running time. However, I tend to prefer shoes to fit true to size and close, so this an adjustment.

A degree of foot swelling is a normal occurrence during longer-distance running. It occurs mostly due to hemolysis, or the destruction of red blood cells during the impact associated with footstrike (Telford et al., 2003). During ultramarathons, it can also be due to increased fluid and electrolyte intake, which are necessary parts of fueling during these longer efforts (Cejka et al., 2012). Foot swelling also naturally occurs throughout the day during non-running activities. It is not uncommon for your feet to be a quarter size larger by the end of the day thanks to gravity, standing, etc. For running, it is incredibly important to have shoes with enough length during long-distance events. Foot swelling and changes in length with short shoes can result in pressure injuries, blisters being the most common, on the ends and sides of the toes. Other compensations can also occur that applied over many miles can potentially put the runner at risk for intrinsic foot muscle/tissue overuse.

Shoe choice between short and long-distance trail races/efforts are completely different. Close-fitting shoes may be fine over 5k-10k trail races but once you go longer, based on the risk of pressure injuries, it is advisable to consider having a shoe with a little extra length. It should not be too long as the forefoot rocker geometry may not line up with your toe joints, causing the shoe to feel stiffer and potentially increasing the workload imposed on the calf and other plantarflexor muscles. A shoe like the Altra Timp 5 that has a little extra length is good. Others may find that depending on individual specific foot swelling, a different size might be needed. The best time to try on trail shoes (and most shoes to be honest) is in the afternoon/evening. In the morning, your feet are naturally smaller (barring some kind of nocturnal swelling issue) and swell throughout the rest of the day. Trying them on during the end of the day will give you a more accurate fit after longer efforts/times on your feet while running. You will still need to do some simulation runs for your race to figure out how much your feet swell and then you can adjust accordingly. Just remember not to be stuck to a specific shoe size. Different shoes fit differently and you may need different lengths depending on the race or effort you are using the shoe for.

References:

Cejka, C., Knechtle, B., Knechtle, P., Rüst, C. A., & Rosemann, T. (2012). An increased fluid intake leads to feet swelling in 100-km ultra-marathoners-an observational field study. Journal of the International Society of Sports Nutrition , 9 (1), 11.