The Altra Lone Peak has been a fan favorite for trail running for some time now. The shoe is normally looked at as being a moderately cushioned trail running shoe that can tackle technical terrain. Since the Lone Peak is decently nimble and protective, it has decent range to it in the trail running shoe offerings.

RUNNING SHOE SUMMARY

The Altra Lone Peak is a trail running shoe aimed to give you a natural feeling of adventure in the trails. The shoe has a decently durable and rugged ready construction for running/hiking through technical terrain with confidence. The shoe is a 0mm drop platform, meaning the heel and the forefoot are the same height. The result is a decently nimble and flexible trail offering on the foot that does do well as a dual runner/hiker.

SIMILAR SHOES: Topo Pursuit

FIT

The Altra Lone Peak 8 had a surprisingly dialed-in fit for me. The length was a little long, though the rest of the lockdown was good enough to where I didn't realize it. The upper material is a rip stop mesh and holds its structure really well when placed in sharp turns or situations where it may stretch. From a comfort standpoint it is decent. It may run a tad warm, but not so warm I was blistering or needing to complain about it. The tongue is padded well and lets you lock the laces down without issue. The lacing system itself does have some wider eyelets integrated into the fabric that seem to help secure the laces wider and tighter around the foot, giving it a good hold. There is an internal heel counter that is lightly padded that wraps around the heel and a little towards the midfoot both medially and laterally. There is also an external heel mold present that also helps with keeping that heel structure. I did not have any irritation, but this was definitely noticeable.

My heel was very locked in and did not feel like it had much room to maneuver. If you like good heel lockdowns this will be a plus. The midfoot had a pretty normal feel to it. The lockdown from the laces was really good and I definitely noticed a good wrap on the midfoot without it feeling intrusive. The forefoot is wide, consistent with the Altra running lineup. The fit and dimensions to the forefoot felt good and it did not feel like my foot was swimming or sliding around at all. This has been one of my better fitting trail uppers this year. There is a flexible toe guard present. It seems to do its job ok, though to be fair, I did not jam my foot into any boulders with any appreciable force to test its integrity. The big theme to this upper is that it is really dialed in and locks down almost like a performance shoe would, but with a tad more plushness.

PERFORMANCE AND STABILITY

The Altra Lone Peak 8 performs really well in a specific category. Those wanting a high stack, rockered, newer foam offering will not find that here. The Lone Peak 8 is in that low-to-moderate cushioning category by today's standard. The overall design is flexible and feels like a pretty good extension of the foot. The Altra EGO midsole is definitely on the firmer end, but still protective enough to knock out some trail miles and adventures. There is not a lot of pop to it, rather a consistent and predictive ride. This is a shoe that wants you to run the way you want to.

In a lot of ways this shoe does not feel like it facilitates your movement in a "speed" or "performance" way, rather a "natural" way. I found this was appreciated in steeper climbs or descents. For me, I tend to struggle with really rockered shoes when climbing steep hills, since I can't get on my toes. The opposite goes on steep descents where it feels like I'm overstriding due to the geometry. I did find in more technical and steep sections I was happy with how natural the shoe felt and I could adjust my own movement patterns without the shoe influencing it too much. There is no rock plate in the Lone Peak 8. I could definitely feel the rocks under my foot, but I would not say it was so much so I would write about it. The MaxTrac outsole traction underfoot was good and held up in the situations I threw at it.

The Altra Lone Peak 8 is certainly a neutral shoe. The whole aim of the shoe is to be a natural extension of the foot and I do feel they pull it off pretty well. With that noted, there are some things they do pretty well from a stability standpoint. The lower stack height, firmer foam, and nice outsole do give a good sense of ground feel. The heel is also very locked in with both an internal and external heel counter. It might even be too locked in for some, but I felt it worked well for me. Upper lockdown and security is also quite good in all regions. With that said, the feel is still similar to that of a traditional flat and does rely on your own mechanics, making this very neutral.

I think the shoe shines most in trails where there are a lot of turns and a real need to be nimble. I did find on flatter runnable sections it was not the most fun and could even be a tad boring. The 0mm drop in this model is definitely noticeable and I did feel my calves and Achilles working more in combination with the flexible design. Despite the flexible design, the heel did feel a tad rigid. The heel construction internally is very sound and makes for a rigid initial contact with how flat the geometry of the shoe is. I do think rounding the heel here a tad could make for a more pleasant initial contact without giving in to a rocker design. If you are looking for a natural extension of the foot and wanting a more flexible design while tackling technical terrain this is definitely an option worth looking into.

Thoughts as a DPT: The Aim of Naturality
By David Salas

Shoes have so many components to them. Everything from the upper, tongue, laces, foam/midsole, outsole/rubber, and the geometry go into what you are feeling on your foot. It is so easy to get lost in the sauce when it comes to integrating these. The ultimate goal for any shoe is to give the runner the best experience that they can get. For many, that experience may look different.