The Novablast series has become incredibly popular over its relatively short lifespan. Debuting as a highly cushioned, lighter training shoe, it has continued on that trajectory. The weight has continued to drop and the stack height has continued to increase. Now, with the addition of some additional bouncy geometry, the newest Novablast adds an edge of performance, further progressing this series.

RUNNING SHOE SUMMARY

Matt: The ASICS Novablast 4 is a highly cushioned performance trainer for those who want a little bit more room and a bouncy stiff ride. The upper features more room than previous versions, providing some extra room for the toes while staying light and breathable. The midsole geometry has been modified to increase the bounciness of the sole with a new geometry and new Flytefoam Blast+ Eco foam. This results in a highly cushioned but slightly clunky heel that transitions into a stiff midfoot and smooth forefoot. This results in an extremely high stack height shoe with some bounce that will work for many as an uptempo/performance trainer, potentially a distance racing shoe and definitely for those who want a snappy bouncy ride and have strong shin muscles.

David: The ASICS Novablast 4 is a daily running shoe that blends together maximum cushioning and a touch of performance as well. The shoe has been updated to include FF Blast+ Eco which provides a slightly firmer foam, but with decent amount of cushion and bounce to it. The Novablast 4 feels a little more "built up" than the previous version due to geometry and upper changes. It leans more on the maximum cushioning training side than the performance side, but can still turn over a little bit and may serve as a recreational racing shoe.

Andrea: The ASIC Novablast 4 is a bouncy, high stack daily trainer that has surprised me with its comfortable fit and cushioned and responsive forefoot. This may be the best ASICS shoe I have tried thanks to its accommodative mesh upper and midsole geometry that works well for me as a midfoot striker. The Flytefoam Blast+ Eco midsole strikes a nice balance between compliance and responsiveness, and the beefy 32.5mm forefoot stack height never feels like it will bottom out. The Novablast 4 has become my go-to daily trainer for easy miles.

PAST MODEL: Asics Novablast 3

FIT

Matt: The ASICS Novablast 4 fits me true to size in my normal men's US size 10. The newly engineered woven mesh upper is on the lighter and slightly wider side throughout the length of the shoe. The forefoot in particular fits a little wider, with just enough room to slightly wiggle the toes. The midfoot also fits a little wider and I had to tighten down the laces for a secure fit. The tongue is on the thinner side with some mild padding and is securely gusseted for security. I did not have issues tightening down the laces, although I still had some mild slippage inside the shoe front to back with smoother socks. The heel fits normally with a ton of heel collar cushioning and a moderately stiff heel counter. Those sensitive to heel counters may not notice the counter initially due to the high level of padding, but may notice it more as the shoe breaks in. The security is fair but requires additional lockdown at the heel. This shoe is meant to go in a straight line and as long as you do that, it should be fine. I would definitely use socks with this upper even though it is on the softer side. There is some exposed stitching at the midfoot and the toe guard rubs a little, both of which are not issues if you use socks.

David: The ASICS Novablast 4 comes in with an updated fit and mesh upper. The new upper has good volume throughout and room for swelling accommodation. The length feels a tad long, but the lockdown from the lacing system is good enough to where I did not need to heel lock the shoe. The upper material feels a tad softer than the previous model and feels like a pretty plush upper for how light it is. There is a lot of padding around the heel collar and there is a heel counter present. The shape and structure of the region seem to be held together well there and I did not have any translation or slippage. The midfoot is normal width with a slightly wide forefoot. This feels like a more anatomic fit than the previous model and ultimately just more cozy. It loses some of the performance feel in the upper, but is much more comfortable for me. The tongue is thin but does have a thin layer of padding which allows you to lace the shoe down pretty snug without any irritation. Outside of the minor length issue, I actually find this upper to be quite comfortable and enjoyable for logging daily miles.

Andrea: The ASICS Novablast 4 is the most comfortable ASICS shoe I have tested. It fits true to size in my usual women's 9.5, and the slightly stretchy mesh upper provides just enough forefoot width and volume that I did not experience any irritation at my 1st and 5th MTPs. I really like the security and overall fit of the midfoot, which ASICS calls their "tongue wing fit system." The tongue is on the thinner side and only the front third of the tongue is gusseted, but the midfoot portion of the upper wraps almost completely around the dorsum of the foot, provide a secure midfoot hold without any tongue slippage or irritation from the laces. It was easy to achieve lockdown in this shoe without stopping multiple times to relace. The rearfoot is normal width, with a rigid counter in the lower half and a moderately padded heel collar. I have no complaints about the fit of this shoe and not only is it the most comfortable ASICS shoe I have tested, it is one of the most comfortable shoes overall I have tested.

PERFORMANCE

Matt: The ASICS Novablast 4 is a performance trainer with a high stack height and uniquely rockered ride. The new FF Blast+ Eco feels slightly firmer and more resilient than the prior version, making for a faster bouncy feel rather than the softer easy cushioned feel fo the past. The weight still feels lower but not the lowest, consistent with the 9.1 oz listed weight (men's size 9). The heel drop is listed at 8mm, although it feels higher. This is likely due to the posteriorly flared and large heel, which does provide extra cushioning but is a little clunky. There is a large heel bevel, but the posterior heel cushioning does cause a slightly early landing that you do get used to with time. This does push your ankle faster to the ground and does make the ride feel snappy when the pace is picked up. This increases the eccentric load through my anterior tibial muscles (anterior tibialis and long toe extensors), so those with a history of shin splints should approach this shoe cautiously. This transitions into a slightly stiff midfoot and finally through a smooth forefoot.

The additional stiffness and bounce make this shoe feel better at uptempo paces. It took 15 miles for this shoe to feel better at easy paces, but uptempo runs, light intervals and moderate distances is where this shoe feels best. It is highly cushioned but not the softest, making it better for those looking to pick up the pace a little but not at a super shoe/racing level. The slappiness of the sole also decreases at faster paces and the bounce/lighter weight make it easy to get there.

Durability-wise the Novablast 4 has been great. I have 30 miles on my pair and do not see any wear on the outsole or my normal spots. The upper has also held up well despite some rain and accidental mud exposure, so those wanting a shoe that will last an above-average number of miles should do well looking at the Novablast 4.

David: The ASICS Novablast 4 sits in an interesting spot. I view the shoe as a daily training shoe, though the previous model did gain some appeal for being a shoe that can be used for workouts and picking up the speed. I do believe the potential is there, but I think this performs better as a daily training shoe. The big updates to the Novablast 4 worth bringing up include the upper change, a midsole foam change, and increasing the toe spring angle. The shoe still uses a trampoline design to the outsole and midsole and does still have a nice bounciness to the foam. The FF Blast+ Eco is 20% bio content and does have some differences to the feel. I will say the foam feels a tad firmer or flatter upon landing on it, but I do feel the bounce through the forefoot is quite good. The toe spring in the forefoot does give you a constant rolling forward that is combined with their forefoot trampoline. This shoe keeps you feeling like you are bouncing forward. The heel does have a lot of sole flaring and uses a bucket type side wall. I feel like the initial contact from the shoe may come off a tad clunky with so much going on. It feels like a posterior lateral bias to the heel may feel smoother than the central bias the shoe currently has. I think this largely in part due to the midsole though. The foam feels a tad firmer upon landing from the previous midsole and just has a little less give, making that wide base and sole flaring more noticeable.

I would not let the heel comment deter viewers though. The shoe does have a very lively and fun forefoot transition. There is a lot of foam here and so the shoe does come off a little bit stiffer throughout, even without the usage of a plate or stiffening agent. The shoe comes off as a very neutral shoe, but thanks to the side walls and sole flaring I do think the Novablast 4 feels more comfortable in a larger variety of situations. Running some bluff trails in it felt much more secure than the previous version. Like noted above, I find this to be a fun lively shoe for the daily training category. It feels like there is a little too much going on and the transitions a tad too clunky for going fast, but one of the better daily trainers this year for me.

Andrea: The ASICS Novablast 4 is a bouncy, protective daily trainer that works well with my mechanics as a midfoot striker. The key features of the shoe for me are the forefoot sole flare, high forefoot stack height, and the resilient Flytefoam Blast+ Eco foam. The forefoot sole flare extends further posteriorly on the lateral side as compared to the medial side, and feels like it corresponds well with where I land. The 32.5mm stack height in the forefoot provides ample protection and cushioning and the later toe spring provides gentle guidance into pushoff. Easy runs in the shoe feel natural, protective, and bouncy. At very easy paces, I do notice the heel slightly, but it doesn't feel like it gets in the way of my mechanics like other higher drop shoes do. If there were one thing I would change about the shoe, it would be to make the heel bevel a little more aggressive. The shoe feels somewhat light on foot, although it would not be my first choice for faster pace runs. The overall comfortable fit and ride of the shoe would make it ideal for long, easy runs, but I have not had an opportunity yet to test it for anything longer than 6 miles.

I have 30 miles on my pair and there is no visible wear on the sole. Traction in this shoe is not great, as I experienced some slipping during a run on wet roads. The upper is relatively breathable, but has also kept my feet warm enough during runs in 25F weather.

TRACTION UPDATE FROM WISCONSIN

Nathan: The Novablast 4 features AHAR-Lo, which is supposed to provide a unique combination of lower density for weight but equivalent durability. We've found that to be true so far in our testing. The traction has been average so far. I ran in a wintery mix, rain, and wet debris and had no issues in the shoe. I would say the traction overall has been average at best. Not super grippy like a Nike waffle outsole, but I have not had issues in the conditions I've run in either.

STABILITY

Matt: The ASICS Novablast 4 continues to be a neutral shoe but is more stable than past iterations and may soon border on stable neutral. The sole width is slightly wider throughout the length of the shoe particularly at the heel and midfoot. The medial and lateral sidewalls are still present but are now larger as the heel sits farther into the sole (called a "nested" design apparently). There are also some mild sidewalls present at the forefoot There is a large amount of sole flare, particularly forefoot with a decent amount at the heel. This makes the forefoot and heel more stable than previous versions and should work for at least moderate distances for those with very mild stability needs. The midfoot continues to be neutral due to its slightly more narrow nature compared to the rest of the shoe as well as the accelerated transition from the posteriorly flared but beveled heel into the midfoot and more bouncy nature of the shoe.

David: The ASICS Novablast 4 is a neutral training shoe and does have too much going on with stability. There are some things I'd like to point out though. The shoe does do a good job of using sole flaring throughout the forefoot. I felt the platform was very trustworthy and the forefoot transition was smooth and bouncy without having any give medially or laterally. The heel feels more built up than the previous version with the change in midsole. The sidewall gives a bucket like hold and the foot feels secure. The upper has a small amount of stretch to it, but provides decent enough security for running and turning. This is is still a very neutral shoe though and the amount of foam does give a certain amount of instability to the platform.

Andrea: The ASICS Novablast 4 is a neutral shoe with some guidance features, which work particularly well for my mechanics. The forefoot sole flare, which extends further posteriorly on the lateral side, provides some added stability for me as a lateral midfoot striker. The later toe spring gently guides pushoff without feeling overly aggressive. The higher midsole stack and resilience in the forefoot work well with the toe spring to encourage forward motion. The secure fit of the upper, particularly the midfoot, helps stabilize the foot in the shoe and prevents foot translation, which can often be a problem with one piece mesh uppers. This shoe probably borders on stable neutral for midfoot or forefoot strikers moreso than it does for reafoot strikers due to its unique forefoot geometry.

Thoughts as a DPT: Modified Rocker Geometries
By Matthew Klein

As the stack heights of shoes increase, they generally become stiffer and begin to interfere with the natural mechanics of the foot/ankle that maintain forward momentum. To maintain that forward momentum, the use of artificial rocker geometries is key to replace the decreased or lost ability of the natural ankle/foot rockers. We have discussed previously that rockered shoes generally reduce forces at the foot and ankle, moving them up higher to the knee and hip (Sobhani et al., 2013; Sobhani et al., 2017). If the rocker matches the mechanics of the foot and ankle, there can also be reduce load on the Achilles tendon/calf complex, although there may be increased load on the hamstring, hip and quad muscles (Agresta et al., 2022).