The ASICS Metaspeed Edge is a late bloomer. The original version paled in comparison to the Sky Tokyo and was not even in the conversation of super shoes. The Edge Plus was a massive improvement and superior to the Sky Plus (in my opinion) due to the better transition and stack height but still seemed like it was missing something. The Edge Paris not only improves on the prior Edges but the entire Metaspeed series. It now sits as the lightest super shoe on the market along with the Metaspeed Sky Paris (185g and 183g respectively), featuring an incredible PEBA midsole and a geometry that makes you want to run fast. From something barely worth mentioning to a stand-out racer clearly in the running for the best super shoe of 2024, the Edge Paris steals the show and is worth considering if it matches your needs and mechanics.

ASICS Metaspeed Edge Paris
Price: $249.95 at Running Warehouse
Weight: 6.5 oz, 185 g (Unisex men's size 9, women's size 10.5)
Stack Height: 39.5 mm / 34.5 mm
Drop: 5 mm
Shoe Purpose: Super Racing Shoe

Pros: Extremely Light, Incredibly Responsive/Fast, Light Breathable Upper
Cons: Thin tongue has to set correctly, mostly neutral ride
RUNNING SHOE SUMMARY

Matt: The ASICS Metaspeed Edge Paris is ASICS' newest super racing shoe along with the Sky Paris. Featuring a new FF Turbo+ PEBA midsole combined with a rocker geometry and plate, this shoe is best for those who want a bouncy and rockered/rolling ride. A smooth transition works best for fast, longer efforts while an incredibly light new upper keeps the foot cool and secure. Now one of the lightest super shoes on the market, the Edge Paris is a highly competitive model for those who want fast aggressive performance.

David: The ASICS Metaspeed Edge Paris is one the two newest super shoes to come from the company. The Edge is the model focused on those who pick up the pace using their cadence. The Metaspeed Edge Paris sees big improvements through a midsole update and some increase in the stack height. This is certainly going to be a top shelf racing shoe.

SIMILAR SHOES: Nike Vaporfly 3
PAST MODEL: ASICS Metaspeed Edge+

FIT
(To learn how a shoe should fit, check out our full podcast on fit by Matt Klein.)

Matt: The ASICS Metaspeed Edge Paris fits me true to size in my normal US Men's size 10. The upper is an incredibly light, breathable material (Motionwrap 2.0) that provides a surprising amount of room and volume for a racing flat. It is not too snug or wide and seems to fit just right. The shape of the shoe is slightly snug. There is a little extra volume in the forefoot that provides some extra height but transitions into a slightly snug midfoot. The ribbed laces stay secure but do require some adjustment to get an optimal fit at the midfoot. Once dialed in, they stay and keep the fit. The tongue is extremely thin and non-gusseted. It did its job protecting my feet from the laces but I did have to be extra careful to lay it flat every run. The heel fits slightly snug with a flexible heel counter and mild heel collar cushioning. Those with haglund deformities should be fine as the counter is minor but still provides structure to the rear portion of the upper. The midfoot and forefoot have less structure, which does not provide a ton of security with turning quickly. Running in straight lines are totally fine, which is how this road racing shoe is designed.

This shoe can be worn for sockless running as I have not had any major issue using it up to 5 miles. The upper and heel collar are comfortable but only those with experience with this should consider this route. Most should use socks which the upper also grips, providing resistance to sliding in the shoe.

Matt's Typical Size: Men's US Size 10
Shoes that have fit Matt well: Saucony Guide 17, ASICS Kayano 30, Hoka Gaviota 5, Saucony Endorphin Elite, Nike Ultrafly
Shoes that have fit snug: Hoka Arahi 7, Saucony Kinvara 14
Shoes that have fit large: Salomon S/Lab Phantasm 2, Altra Timp 5

David: The ASICS Metaspeed Edge Paris fits true to size in my men's 9.5. The fit throughout is relatively normal width and fits with a snug lockdown from the lacing system. Nothing on this shoe feels wasted and the upper tells some of that story. The engineered mesh is very breathable, but does hold its structure surprisingly well. There is not too much stretch when it is loaded in different directions. The tongue is very thin, but still gives enough padding for the thin flat laces to lock down without issue. There is a flexible heel counter that does just enough to hold the structure for the region. I really feel like ASICS nailed the fit on this one. For those wanting a lot of volume or a wide fit won't find it here, but it is very dialed in without feeling intrusive.

David's Typical Size: Men's US Size 9.5
Shoes that have fit David well: Nike Vomero 17, Saucony Ride 16/17, Topo Cyclone 2
Shoes that have fit snug: Adidas Boston 12 (though still well), HOKA Arahi 7
Shoes that have fit large: Salomon Aero Glide, Altra Paradigm

Doctors of Running Checklist

Is This a Good Shoe for Walking: No
Is This a Good Shoe for Standing: No
Is the Forefoot Flexible: No
How Flexible is the Shoe: Stiff
Is This a Good Heel Bevel: Yes
Recommended for Haglunds: Yes (mostly)
Recommended for Sockless: Can be done, but should be experienced in running sockless
Durability Expectation: Average

PERFORMANCE

Matt: The ASICS Metaspeed Edge Paris is a super racing shoe for those who want a fast, bouncy, and rolling ride. The geometry of the Edge Paris is meant for those who like more of a rolling sensation but the PEBA foam still provides a bouncy and incredibly fast ride. The new FF Turbo Plus midsole is PEBA and the changes make this the lightest super shoe on the market besides the Sky Paris. Coming in at 6.5 oz for men's size 9, it feels incredibly light and fast on foot. There is a 5 mm heel drop now thanks to the increase in stack height in the forefoot (compared to the prior version). However, I did not realize this until I looked at the tech sheet (I thought it was still 8mm like the prior version).

Info provided by Asics

The well-beveled heel, good forefoot rocker, and quick transition made me not notice the lower drop. The forefoot does not have any flexibility thanks to the stiff plate. The toes are kept fairly neutral as the toe spring is mild (those with toe stiffness problems should be fine here). However, the rocker feels like it starts early and provides a smooth transition forward. The new midsole is incredibly bouncy (far more so than the prior version), slightly soft but not mushy. I have used this shoe for intervals, longer threshold efforts, and a two-mile stroller time trial (10:58). The Edge Paris feels best at tempo to slightly longer race efforts as its bouncy rolling ride makes it incredibly easy to get into a rhythm. It struggled for me during all out sprinting efforts but this is more of a distance racing shoe. However, during my two mile stroller time trial it felt easy to hit 5:30s and I was even able to accelerate at the end. The Edge Paris excels at 5k to marathon efforts as I have tested it at all of them. It also translates between them and pace adjustments into a new rhythm are easy.

I personally do not know if I could take this for a marathon due to its more neutral nature. but those without stability needs who want an incredibly light and fast shoe will be fine. For me, it would be best for 5k to half marathon races and I plan to use it as such as my schedule opens up post-PhD. Traction-wise the ASICS Grip does extremely well on both dry and wet road. I would not take this on trail due to the exposed midsole but on smooth dirt it would probably be fine (there are better options for softer surfaces).

Durability-wise I am beginning to see a little abrasion on the outsole in my normal posterior lateral section after 20 miles of hard use. I will continue to get miles on them, but am expecting an average to slightly above-average number of miles out of them for a super racing shoe.

David: I am going to come out and say it immediately. This is one of the best performing racing shoes of this year so far. The Edge series did a few things that really made for some big improvements. The shoe lost a considerable amount of weight and weighs 6.7 oz in my 9.5. The shoe also gained stack height through the forefoot and updated to a more responsive foam. Those are some pretty big changes for some pretty big results. The shoe has a very lively and bouncy ride to it without feeling unstable. The forefoot rocker does begin pretty early and does give you a constant rolling forward sensation without being overly involved. I have found that the shoe really responds to a variety of paces and I can honestly take this 5k to marathon without much issue. The turning is ok, but not many super shoes kill it there. The traction underfoot is actually really good and I have had no issues with gripping the ground even in wet conditions. The heel has a good bevel that gets you onto the midfoot pretty smooth and is followed up by an early rounding in the forefoot. The Flytefoam Turbo + midsole has quite a bit of responsiveness and bounce to it as well without feeling overly soft. I will say the platform underfoot is a very normal width, and perhaps even slightly narrow. Those wanting a no nonsense neutral shoe to go fast in have that in the Metaspeed Edge Paris.

STABILITY

Matt: The ASICS Metaspeed Edge Paris is a neutral racing shoe. There are no traditional methods of stability. There is a slightly higher medial arch, mild midfoot sidewall with that arch and a small lateral midfoot sidewall. These provide mild guidance at the midfoot. The heel is fairly neutral thanks to a more narrow platform. The forefoot is a bit wider and combined with the stiffness commonly found in plated super shoes and the quick forefoot rocker does keep motion forward. It is also fairly stiff, so those who respond to a stiff forefoot will do well in this shoe. The midfoot does narrow quite a bit but is offset slightly by the mild midfoot guidance. Overall, I have not found this shoe to be overly stable or unstable, sitting squarely in the neutral category.

David: The ASICS Metaspeed Edge Paris is very neutral. This is about as neutral as things come. The upper lock down and outsole traction really shine in this model, but the narrow platform and compliant foam do give some inherent instability. It does not feel unstable, rather just not "stable". The heel and midfoot have a pretty narrow platform, though the wider forefoot does save it. This shoe is all about getting you onto that forefoot quickly.

Thoughts as a DPT: The Purpose of Plates in Super Shoes
By Matthew Klein

The majority of running companies have demonstrated that they understand the criteria for true high-performance super shoes. This type of footwear requires the right midsole foam (generally PEBA or some variation of it), a maximal stack height (as close to 40mm as possible), appropriate geometry to maintain forward moment in such a tall shoe (rockered), with a stiff midsole plate (generally carbon). For an incredibly long time, companies were advertising the plate to be the most important component that "returned energy." This is absolutely not how plates function and the energy "return" comes mostly from the resiliency of the midsole foam. In fact, the majority of running economy benefit seems to come from the midsole foam (Healey & Hoogkamer, 2022; Herbert-Losier & Pamment, 2022). There is also clear evidence that lighter weight also plays a part with evidence suggesting that for every 100g less a shoe weighs, there is a 1% improvement in running economy (Rodrigo-Carranza et al., 2020). So what do the plates do? The majority of running companies have demonstrated that they understand the criteria for true high-performance super shoes. This type of footwear requires the right midsole foam (generally PEBA or some variation of it), a maximal stack height (as close to 40mm as possible), appropriate geometry to maintain forward moment in such a tall shoe (rockered), with a stiff midsole plate (generally carbon). For an incredibly long time, companies were advertising the plate to be the most important component that "returned energy." This is absolutely not how plates function and the energy "return" comes mostly from the resiliency of the midsole foam. In fact, the majority of running economy benefit seems to come from the midsole foam (Healey & Hoogkamer, 2022; Herbert-Losier & Pamment, 2022). There is also clear evidence that lighter weight also plays a part with evidence suggesting that for every 100g less a shoe weighs, there is a 1% improvement in running economy (Rodrigo-Carranza et al., 2020). So what do the plates do?

The most important thing that plates do is help facilitate motion and direct forces. This is achieved by providing stiffness that stabilizes these incredibly soft midsole foams (Agresta et al., 2022). It is also accomplished through unique shaping that guides both the foot and its application of forces through the length of the shoe (Ortega et al., 2021). The shape can greatly influence the perceived stiffness of the shoe, which will be best for different people depending on how their metatarsophalangeal joint (toe joints) mechanics line up with the curve of the plate (Agresta et al., 2022; Mcleod et al., 2020). Measuring the optimal amount of curve for each person's toe/foot mechanics is difficult to do and is usually better determined through comfort perception and prior history with different plates and stiffness levels.

Instead of making this too complicated, people may need to think about what kind of ride they want. The curved plate of the Metaspeed Edge Paris will give a more rockered/rolling ride, while the flatter plate of the Metaspeed Sky Paris will provide a stiffer ride. ASICS has tried to separate people into groups based on stride characteristics (stride vs cadence). There are certainly some runners with a "cadence" or "stride" pattern that may match with the Edge and Sky appropriately. There are also going to be those who do not match despite supposedly having the correct mechanics. Comfort perception is still a gold standard for prescribing shoes as individual preferences can sometimes transcend beyond our biomechanical understandings. Therefore, learning what type of transition/ride you like/want and what shoes/components can provide that is the best bet for figuring out what will work optimally for you as an individual.

References:

Agresta, C., Giacomazzi, C., Harrast, M., & Zendler, J. (2022). Running Injury Paradigms and Their Influence on Footwear Design Features and Runner Assessment Methods: A Focused Review to Advance Evidence-Based Practice for Running Medicine Clinicians. Frontiers in Sports and Active Living , 4 , 815675.

Healey, L. A., & Hoogkamer, W. (2022). Longitudinal bending stiffness does not affect running economy in Nike Vaporfly shoes. Journal of sport and health science , 11 (3), 285-292.

Hébert-Losier, K., & Pamment, M. (2022). Advancements in running shoe technology and their effects on running economy and performance–a current concepts overview. Sports Biomechanics , 1-16.

McLeod, A. R., Bruening, D., Johnson, A. W., Ward, J., & Hunter, I. (2020). Improving running economy through altered shoe bending stiffness across speeds. Footwear Science , 12 (2), 79-89.

Ortega, J. A., Healey, L. A., Swinnen, W., & Hoogkamer, W. (2021). Energetics and biomechanics of running footwear with increased longitudinal bending stiffness: a narrative review. Sports Medicine , 51 (5), 873-894.

Rodrigo-Carranza, V., González-Mohíno, F., Santos-Concejero, J., & González-Ravé, J. M. (2020). Influence of shoe mass on performance and running economy in trained runners. Frontiers in Physiology , 11 , 573660.

RECOMMENDATIONS

Matt: The ASICS Metaspeed Edge Paris has exceeded my expectations. While keeping the price point the same, ASICS has dropped almost an ounce off the prior version while dramatically improving the foam and even increasing the stack height. Along with the Sky Paris, these are the lightest super shoes on the market and some of the best. My only two recommendations are to consider securing the tongue a little more and to think about a little more guidance in this shoe for longer distance efforts/races. Adding a mild tongue gusset may help lock the upper in a little more with quick turns. A little more heel guidance may be helpful over longer-distance racing, but I have not been able to take this shoe past 10 miles yet. So additional testing will be needed to further look at recommendations there (will update asap).

David: I really enjoyed my time in the Metaspeed Edge Paris. The responsiveness, weight, and traction really did exceed expectations. The thing for me is that I know some may find the heel and midfoot a tad unstable, especially for longer distances. I do think adding a tad bit of sole flare, sidewall, or something to help give a touch of guidance could really make this shoe a winner when translating to fatigued mechanics or longer distances. This is still an "everything" race shoe though.

WHO IS THIS SHOE FOR?

Matt: The ASICS Metaspeed Edge Paris is for those who want an incredibly light and bouncy super shoe that provides a fast rolling ride. The upper fit provides a little extra volume in the forefoot while still being slightly snug and secure when running in the sagittal plane. The stability is best for those with more neutral mechanics or those who like a tiny bit of midfoot guidance with a stiff rockered forefoot. The Turbo+ midsole is extremely fast and best for those who want to race from 5k to marathon if your mechanics allow it. It is now my racing shoe of choice given the new midsole material, ride and incredible weight. Its $250 is quite reasonable given that others in this performance range are charging $10-$50 more and also considering the massive improvements here over the prior version. This is a huge step forward for ASICS in their racing line-up. I am curious to see whether consumers prefer the Edge Paris or Sky Paris. My current hypothesis is that the Edge Paris will be more popular given the more rockered ride but only time will tell.

David: The ASICS Metaspeed Edge Paris feels like a true complimentary competitor to the Vaporfly 3. The shoes both have similar weights, platforms, and forefoot rockers. The rocker is a little earlier on the Edge Paris, but this for someone that wants a light neutral racing shoe without anything extra this is it. Those that may need more stability elements may need to look elsewhere, but this is a very race ready option for those with neutral race mechanics.

GRADES

Matt
Fit: A- (Extremely light upper with a little extra forefoot volume. Thin tongue that needs to be flattened appropriately)
Performance: A (Fast, bouncy, rolling, rhythmic ride best for 5k to marathon efforts - for neutral runners).
Stability: B/B+ [Neutral] (Mild midfoot centered guidance with neutral heel and stiff but rockered forefoot)
Value: A- (Expensive, but maintains price despite massive improvements. One of the lightest and best super shoes on the market)
Personal: A- (New foam and geometry work so well for my mechanics. My new race day shoe of choice, however I will have to further test over longer distances beyond a half marathon to see if I can handle it stability-wise)
Overall Design: A-

David
Fit: A- (Very light and breathable with good lockdown, I had a tiny bit of slippage initially, so tongue security could probably be improved through the midfoot to prevent some heel rise)
Performance: A (On par with any other race shoe on the market).
Stability: B (Not bad, not great. Very neutral offering. Good traction and upper lockdown. Narrow platform.)
Value: A (This is relative to the current market. $250 is consistent with other offerings.)
Personal: A (Very responsive nad light, my new road 5k/10k shoe, maybe even half to full marathon)
Overall Design: A-

SHOP | SUPPORT DOR

ASICS Metaspeed Edge Paris
Price: $249.95 at Running Warehouse (coming soon)

Shop Men | Shop Women

Check out Gear We Love
Naked Belt The best way to carry your phone and goods on the run. No bounce and various sizes for waist.
Saysky Running Gear: We were really taken aback by this Scandinavian company's ultra-thin, durable performance clothing
Skratch Recovery, Coffee Flavor: Mental and physical boost post run. Coffee flavor is excellent and goes great straight into a fresh brewed cup
goodr Sunglases: Run in style with goodr's super fun sunglasses.
Feetures Socks: Massively grippy socks that will make you feel more one with the shoe
Amphipod Hydraform Handheld Water Bottle: Perfect for long runs when you need hydration in the summer
Trigger Point Foam Roller: Help get those knots out post-run and feel better for tomorrow
Ciele Hat: Our team's favorite running hat of choice!
Fractel Hats: Our team's wider fitting running hat of choice!

FURTHER READING

Asics Metaspeed Sky Paris | Review

Under Armour Velociti Elite 2 | Review