With the continued trend of maximal stack heights and the recent injection of super foams onto the trail scene, finding moderate stack height, lighter trail shoes has been challenging. Most shoes are either minimal and extremely light or high stack with super foams. The Catamount series has stayed consistent over the last few years in weight and design, sticking to a moderate stack height and a mid-9 oz weight. Version 3 looks similar to Version 2, but boasts some upper updates that greatly improve the fit of the shoe. Brooks clearly thinks they have a winner and have attempted to carefully refine the shoe to not disappoint those who have run in prior versions.

Brooks Catamount 3
Price: $169.95 at Running Warehouse
Weight: 9.4 oz, 266 g (men's size 9), 8.4 oz, 238 g (women's size 8)
Stack Height: 30 mm / 24 mm
Drop: 6 mm
Shoe Purpose: Trail Uptempo/Racing Shoe

Pros: Nimble, Snappy Ride, Durable
Cons: Firmer Ride, No Super Foam Despite being a Racing Shoe

RUNNING SHOE SUMMARY

The Brooks Catamount 3 is a uptempo/racing shoe with a traditional nimble feel. A new upper sits up top that provides a secure, lower volume fit with just enough wiggle room in the toes. The DNA Flash midsole provides a firmer ride while a Sky Vault plate provides a snappy toe off and doubles as a rock plate. While Version 3 looks similar to Version 2, the improved security of the upper makes for an even more nimble ride for those who want a shoe that can move at quicker speeds on softer surfaces.

SIMILAR SHOES: On Cloudvista
PAST MODEL: Brooks Catamount 2

FIT
(To learn how a shoe should fit, check out our full podcast on fit by Matt Klein.)

Matt: The Brooks Catamount 3 fits me true to size in my normal men' US size 10. The fit is slightly snug width wise with a lower volume. The forefoot fits slightly snug with a low hanging upper. The toe guard adds plenty of structure in this area. This makes it feel more snug than it is while the mesh still adds a tiny bit of wiggle room. The midfoot fits snug with a well gusseted, thinner tongue. While I did tie the laces down for security, I did not have to tie them much to get a good secure lockdown. The heel fits snug with a moderately stiff heel counter. There is only a little bit of heel collar padding, so the counter sits right up against the heel. Those who want the secure feeling of a counter will like this shoe while those with heel sensitivities will probably not do well (it did bother me a little). With the toe guard and a slightly scratchy interior, I would suggest wear socks with this shoe especially over longer runs. Overall the fit is secure and snug with laces that easily secure this shoe for a variety of footwork.

Typical Size: Men's US Size 10
Shoes that have fit Matt well: Saucony Guide 17, ASICS Kayano 30, Hoka Gaviota 5, Saucony Endorphin Elite, Nike Ultrafly
Shoes that have fit snug: Hoka Arahi 7, Saucony Kinvara 14
Shoes that have fit large: Salomon S/Lab Phantasm 2, Altra Timp 5

Doctors of Running Checklist

Is This a Good Shoe for Walking: No
Is This a Good Shoe for Standing: No
Is the Forefoot Flexible: No
How Flexible is the Shoe: Moderately Stiff
Is This a Good Heel Bevel: Moderately
Recommended for Haglunds: No
Recommended for Sockless: No
Durability Expectation: Above Average

PERFORMANCE

Matt: The Brooks Catamount 3 is a lightweight trail trainer/trail racing shoe. It feels lighter than its 9.4 oz weight (men's size 9), but also does not feel like the lightest shoe out there. The full length DNA flash midsole with a moderate stack height feels more firmer and snappy than cushioned. There is a 6mm drop listed and that is exactly what it feels like (slightly lower). The rearfoot features a slightly lateral posterior bevel, which decent transitions at heel strike. The Sky Vault plate does stiffen up the ride, making the midfoot a quick transition. The forefoot feels moderately stiff at normal paces and most comes alive at faster paces. I have not found uphill running at normal speeds to be that exciting, but running faster or at uptempo speeds engages the plate much better and both up and downhill running. The more toe extension you get, the more things snap back. The firmer cushioning makes this shoe better for shorter efforts.

Those who want a little less shoe may be able to take this for longer distances, but most people will find this best for 10k to half marathon distance trail efforts. It can handle faster and uptempo efforts, but is not the fastest or lightest shoe on the market. It can also handle easier efforts it you like a more moderate stack height and traditional ride. Despite being a more middle to shorter distance trail shoe, the durability, traction and versatility are quite good. Half of my 25 miles are on road, which felt fine if slightly firm. Trail miles obviously feel best in this shoe and the lugs grip quite on gravel and dirt. They are not the deepest, but do great for the majority of soft terrain. What I was surprised most about is the good durability despite road use. I have 25 miles on my pair with barely any wear on the outsole. For those reasons, I expect this to last much longer than other shoes in this class.

STABILITY

Matt: The Brooks Catamount 3 is a neutral trail shoe but there are a few methods that may make it more stable for certain people. The most obvious is the large sidewalls in the heel. These do a great job of securing and centering the heel at initial contact. These work well with the slightly lateral posterior heel bevel and a decent amount of sole flare to provide a stable rearfoot. This transitions to a more neutral midfoot as the sole narrows and the sidewalls taper off. The forefoot widens and has some additional stiffness from the plate, make it mildly stable. Those who need heel guidance will do best in this shoe, while those needing midfoot stability may not find enough.

Thoughts as a DPT: Pros/Cons of Moderate Stack Height Trail Shoes
By Matthew Klein