The Brooks Caldera is the highly cushioned trail running shoe for the company. The shoe has always been characterized by having large amounts of foam, decent traction, and no rock plate. The shoe continues its lineage with a few tweaks in the midsole and fit.

Brooks Caldera 7
Price: $149.95 at Running Warehouse
Weight: 10.6 oz, 300g (men's size 9), 9.4 oz, 266g (women's size 8)
Stack Height: 39mm heel // 33mm forefoot
Drop: 6mm
Shoe Purpose: Maximum cushion trail running shoe

Pros: Good stability and cushion underfoot, decent traction
Cons: Low volume forefoot can create pressure when at toe off

RUNNING SHOE SUMMARY

The Brooks Caldera 7 is a maximum cushion trail running shoe for a decent variety of trails. The shoe does not have a rock plate, though plenty of foam underfoot to absorb harder objects under you. The shoe uses DNA Loft V3 to give a softer underfoot experience. This will be a workhorse trail running shoe and maybe ultra distance racing shoe, though it is not necessarily intended to go fast.

SIMILAR SHOES: HOKA Stinson 7, Salomon Glide Max TR
PAST MODEL: Brooks Caldera 6

FIT
(To learn how a shoe should fit, check out our full podcast on fit by Matt Klein.)

David: The Brooks Caldera 7 fits true to size in my Men's 9.5, though does have an interesting fit. The heel and midfoot are decently wide and accommodating. The forefoot is normal width. The material in the heel collar and midfoot is definitely plush and does give pretty good comfort. The mesh material through the midfoot and forefoot thins out some but still is decently soft for a trail shoe. The volume tells a different story though. As stated before, the heel and midfoot have good accommodation for width and volume, though the forefoot has a pretty low volume relative to the lacing system. It can feel as though you have some pressure on the top of your forefoot and toes when you go to push off. I can certainly see this being an issue for some if they need a little more room in that region.

The lacing system does a pretty good job of locking down and the tongue is padded enough to prevent any biting. There is some reinforcement along the edges of the upper that help hold its structure. The upper is not bad, but the forefoot does feel like a separate entity than the heel. Some more volume in that region would make for a much more pleasurable experience in the Caldera 7.

David's Typical Size: Men's US Size 9.5
Shoes that have fit David well: Nike Vomero 17, Saucony Ride 16, Puma Velocity Nitro 3
Shoes that have fit snug: HOKA Arahi 7
Shoes that have fit large: Salomon Aero Glide

Doctors of Running Checklist

Is This a Good Shoe for Walking: Yes
Is This a Good Shoe for Standing: Yes
Is the Forefoot Flexible: No
How Flexible is the Shoe: It's not
Is This a Good Heel Bevel: Decent
Recommended for Haglunds: No
Recommended for Sockless: No
Durability Expectation: Above Average

PERFORMANCE

The Brooks Caldera 7 performs pretty well. The shoe is a maximum cushioned trail shoe for crushing easy miles on the trail. I do feel it does this well. The DNA Loft V3 does provide pretty good cushioning underfoot. There are really large sidewalls build into the midsole along the medial and lateral aspects of the heel and forefoot. These are noticeable, so if you are sensitive to big sidewalls, you may want to look at something else. The heel has a decent bevel to it with a gradual rounding through the forefoot.

The shoe does not feel to clunky for how much foam is under it. The transitions are very gradual and feel pretty smooth at easy paces. The only thing that is noticeable in a negative way is the forefoot upper/platform integration. The volume does feel low. The sensation I would get in that region is a creasing type pressure from above into my forefoot when pushing off. I could still get my runs done without blisters, but this is a sensation I would feel pretty much every run at nearly all paces.

Traction underfoot is pretty good and I did not find myself in any situations wishing for more of it. This is a high stack trail running shoe with a very gentle rocker. For the size, the nimbleness of the shoe isn't too bad. The 10.6 oz weight is decently competitive with other max cushion trails shoes as well.

STABILITY
(Learn more about stability in our full guide)

The Brooks Caldera 7 does a pretty good job of incorporating some stability elements into the shoe. The first thing I noticed was the wide platform underfoot. It almost feels clog like at first, but once you start moving that goes away. The midsole has large sidewalls that extend along the exterior of the rearfoot and forefoot. This does give you a good sense of centering and some subjective holding sensations in those regions as well. The upper has decent security, though can put some pressure through the forefoot. The outsole traction is good underfoot and should work for a good majority of trail conditions.

Thoughts as a DPT: Why Dropping Speed for Comfort and Stability Can Be Good?
By David Salas

There is a time and place for things. When making a shoe for comfort and stability, some of the sleek and fast components of shoes may get dropped. For a high cushioned trail running shoe you are going to want decent stability underfoot to accompany the increased amount of foam and natural loss of proprioception that comes along with it. Some things that Brooks did well with the Caldera 7 was integrating a platform that feels stable underfoot in both static and dynamic conditions. The wide base underfoot gives you a very familiar platform to stand on. The sole flaring and sidewalls give you a little push back if you sway too far in either direction, being medially or laterally. The rounding of the platform was also not very dramatic. This keeps you from rocking too quickly forwards and backwards. Why would this be a good thing in a shoe when every company is making large rockers?