HOKA has been one of the fastest growing footwear companies in the game over the last decade. Over the last couple of years we have seen big improvements in their performance and racing division. The Transport X creates a different category for the company though. The Transport X is a "do it all" shoe that is meant to transcend into literally everything from lifestyle through daily running.

Hoka Transport X
Price: $199.95 at Running Warehouse
Weight: 9.6 oz, 272g (men's size 9), not provided (unisex) oz, g (women's size 8)
Stack Height: 36mm heel/ 31mm forefoot
Drop: 5mm
Shoe Purpose: Lifestyle sneaker// Daily running shoe

Pros: Comfortable for standing/walking/easy rhythmic miles, stylish
Cons: Price, some heel slippage

RUNNING SHOE SUMMARY

The Hoka Transport X is a daily trainer that is also heavily focused on dueling as a daily general use shoe and trainer. The original Transport offered a versatile walking option for both city and trail use. The super critical midsole in the new Transport X helps provides a good deal of cushioning suitable for now both lifestyle use and running. The shoe also features a carbon fiber plate.

FIT
(To learn how a shoe should fit, check out our full podcast on fit by Matt Klein.)

The HOKA Transport X fits true to size in my men's 9.5, though does run a little long. This did create some heel slippage with my first usage or two. I did end up switching to using the final eyelet (though no runners heel lock) which seemed to clear that up. The width through out feels very normal and consistent with most shoes. The classic big medial HOKA sidewall is not nearly as evident in the Transport X. The upper material has a synthetic feel to it, but still is decently comfortable. There is a decently rigid heel counter that I had no issues with. The laces are long enough to use the final eyelet without issue. The tongue is thin, but padded just enough to prevent any biting from the laces.

The aesthetics of the shoe are pleasing and I have worn this in the clinic several times, as well as a county fair without issue. The midsole foam and upper do rinse pretty well if you are trying to clean the shoe. The foam seems to get dust on it easily, though the dust and dirt come off nearly just as easily. If you have the shoe on for long hours, it can get a tad warm, as I have found my feet having some sweat and dampness around the heel region at the end of the day with lifestyle use. Overall though I am pleased with the upper. I think making that region a tad more breathable and dialing the length in a little better would make for a better experience.

David's Typical Size: Men's US Size 9.5
Shoes that have fit David well: Nike Vomero 17, Saucony Ride 16, Puma Velocity Nitro 3
Shoes that have fit snug: HOKA Arahi 7
Shoes that have fit large: Salomon Aero Glide

Doctors of Running Checklist

Is This a Good Shoe for Walking: Yes
Is This a Good Shoe for Standing: Yes
Is the Forefoot Flexible:
How Flexible is the Shoe:
Is This a Good Heel Bevel:
Recommended for Haglunds:
Recommended for Sockless:
Durability Expectation: Average

PERFORMANCE

The performance review of this section will take lifestyle, easy daily mileage, and light up-tempo work in mind. The HOKA Transport X performed decently well for all of the above. I will say the shoe shined brightest as a lifestyle shoe, though once it broke in the daily miles actually were pretty comfortable for my runs.

The foam is a supercritical foam, though it does still run on the firmer side. The foam comes to life more when you really push into it. I have found strides and light uptempo efforts to wake the foam up. At easier paces and lifestyle use, it feels like a more structured foam though. The platform of the shoe is quite stiff throughout thanks to the carbon plate that runs through it. The geometry is rockered, though not so dramatic that you can't stand in it. The heel bevel is pretty early and the forefoot rocker is more late. This still gives you a decently flat standing platform.

For walking, I found that this worked pretty well. This did need some breaking in for running. I found the heel to be a little clunky at first, but after a few runs the foam and the platform broke in some and that got smoother. The late forefoot rocker is nice for falling into rhythm. The shoe does retail at $200 which is pretty steep. I think there are two big questions that someone needs to answer when looking at the shoe.

The first question may feel silly... but this is one of the shoes that you do need to like how it looks. If this shoe is to truly meet its value, this will have to be that everything shoe that you wear day-in and day-out for both lifestyle and running. The second question is whether or not you like a firmer ride with a late stage rocker. If the answer to both of those is yes, you might get your moneys worth. I do have some wear in my posterior lateral heel, though it is hard to say whether or not it would be any more than normal. Only time will tell on the durability of my pair. I think the shoe could be worth $200 for the right person, though I think it will be a tough sell for most.

-

STABILITY
(Learn more about stability in our full guide)

For being a neutral shoe the Transport X has decent stability throughout. The shoe does have a classic bucket sensation in the heel like most HOKAs. There is a small sidewall in the heel region, though this does not extend into the midfoot. There is sole flaring both in the heel and in the forefoot. The platform itself is firmer and rigid throughout. The upper security is also pretty good throughout. The outsole traction is pretty average for most walking and road running situations. There is a good amount of flare in the heel, where I feel the most stability is in this model. The rest of the shoe runs pretty neutral.

Thoughts as a DPT: Lifestyle Usage
By David Salas
The HOKA Transport X is an interesting shoe, in that is mean to double as a daily lifestyle shoe and running shoe in the same package. The shoe does both decently well, though I am going to focus on the lifestyle and walking side of things for this. When designing a lifestyle shoe, it is important to look at comfort both standing and moving. The shoe certainly has enough foam and structure to it to get the job done, and so I shift my attention to the platform and geometry. Our feet have some natural curvatures to them that many call rocker points. The most prominent of the bunch is in our calcaneus and heel, essentially our heel rocker point.