As super racing shoes have begun to max out foam types and stack heights, new geometries to either reduce weight, facilitate motion or get around stack height rules have begun to appear. The original Rebellion Pro was a unique example of this. It featured large central cut-outs of the midsole and one of the most extreme heel bevels we had seen (outside of the Wave Duel Pro which was never available in the US). The apex of the bevel was in a spot that still worked for heel/midfoot strikers and made for an interesting/fast ride. The Wave Rebellion Pro 2 takes that even further with a bevel design that works almost exclusively for mid and forefoot strikers. Combined with a bouncier midsole, this super shoe continues the 2024 super racing shoe trend toward increased aggressiveness Whether that translates to faster times will depend on the individual.

RUNNING SHOE SUMMARY

Matt: The Mizuno Wave Rebellion Pro 2 is a super racing shoe with a unique midsole geometry that makes it best for those who land farther forward. An exaggerated heel bevel extends to the posterior midfoot, making it best for those who land at the midfoot or heel. A combination of Enerzy Lite+ and Enerzy Lite make for a bouncy and leg-saving ride that works especially well at tempo and half marathon paces. A tricky upper fits slightly short due to a toe box taper. Some will need a half-size up while others may find a perfect fit for longer distances. Best for those who want the most extremely rockered sole on the market and those who land farther forward, the Mizuno Wave Rebellion Pro 2 returns even more aggressive than its predecessor.

Andrea: The Mizuno Wave Rebellion Pro 2 is Mizuno's super shoe that features an extremely aggressive heel bevel and a snappy, fast ride. As a midfoot striker, the Wave Rebellion Pro 2 is the most natural feeling super shoe I've tested thanks to the extreme heel bevel. The sweet spot of this shoe is landing at or just in front of the apex of the heel bevel, and for me that corresponds to half marathon to marathon paces. Like Matt, I found getting the fit dialed in challenging due to the flexible heel counter and slightly short fit, but ultimately found a solution going from my usual size in men's to 1/2 size up in women's (more details in the fit section). This shoe will be a great option for midfoot strikers or heel strikers who tend to land further forward at faster paces. I have enjoyed this shoe so much that I will be racing in it at the Osaka Marathon next month.

PAST MODEL: Mizuno Wave Rebellion Pro 1

FIT

Matt: The Mizuno Wave Rebellion Pro 2 fits me slightly short in my normal men's US size 10. It is not as short as the original version and there is a slightly above average amount of width in the midfoot and heel. The toe box does taper fairly quickly and puts some pressure on my lateral toes (more so on my left and longer foot). Those considering using this as a half to marathon racer should consider a half size up, while those using the Rebellion Pro 2 for shorter races may be able to stay true to size. The forefoot does fit slightly snug, especially on the lateral aspect of the foot and the volume is low. The light engineered mesh is thin and extremely well-ventilated. Unlike version 1 of this shoe, it is actually comfortable against bare skin and I have been able to do several shorter runs in this shoe sockless without issue. I would not do this for longer distances, but those using this as a shorter distance racer may be able to get more space by going sockless (do this at your own risk). The midfoot fits normal to slightly wide for a racing shoe. There is a tiny bit of increased upper structure at the midfoot but I mostly had to tie the laces down tighter to get a secure fit. Even still, I had some sliding back and forth that caused even more pressure on my toes during runs. This did require me to lace lock the shoe. The tongue is extremely thin and non-gusseted, so care has to be taken with tying the laces to not put too much pressure on the top of your foot. The heel fits normal to slightly snug with no heel counter and a tiny bit of heel collar padding at the most section of the foot. Despite the general lack of structure outside the toe guard that contributed to giving me some blisters on my toes, I was eventually able to get a secure fit by lace locking the shoe. I still had some mild sliding in the shoe, so those who are between sizes should definitely go up a half size. The lighter upper does feel great for keeping the weight down and providing a racing-style fit, but the tapered toe box kept me at shorter mileage in this shoe.

Andrea: I originally requested a men's size 8 in the Wave Rebellion Pro 2, because Mizuno shoes typically fit true to length, but are a little narrow in the toe box for me. The men's 8 provided more than enough width in the toe box, but was just slightly short. The midfoot also fits somewhat wide, which combined with the flexible heel counter and minimally padded heel collar, resulted in heel slippage and mild big toenail bruising. I had a couple of workouts where I was mainly running in a straight line on a bike path in which I didn't have any big toenail irritation, but the workouts I did on crowned roads with a lot of turns resulted in more foot translation in the shoe. After receiving a women's 10 in the Wave Rebellion Flash 2 last week and finding the fit to be near perfect, I asked Mizuno if I could test a women's 10 in the Wave Rebellion Pro 2, which soon arrived at my doorstep. Mizuno confirmed that the men's and women's shoes are built on different lasts. The women's 10 (which is a 1/2 size up from my usual women's 9.5) fits perfectly. It has a few millimeters of additional length, fits slightly narrower in the toe box, but not too narrow, and fits more securely in the midfoot. For me, the combination of the additional length and more secure fit in the midfoot completely resolved the heel slippage and toenail irritation I had in the men's 8. Men with a narrower midfoot might consider getting the women's model for a better fit. Other fit characteristics of note include a non-gusseted tongue that is held in place by two lace loops. They do a good job of stabilizing the tongue, but I did have to be careful when donning the shoe to not let the edges of the tongue fold over. The upper is a thin mesh material that does not stretch and is given structure by internal straps at the midfoot and Mizuno overlays on the medial and lateral aspects, with the lateral overlay being larger and extending further forward.

Mizuno Wave Rebellion Pro 1 vs. 2 Fit Comparison

In comparing the fit of Wave Rebellion Pro 1 to 2 (I have a women's 10 in v1), v2 is slightly longer, has a wider toe box, and a slightly wider midfoot. Heel security in v1 is better because the heel counter has a little more structure and internal padding. The mesh in v1 is thicker and v1 has a row of extra eyelets, while v2 does not. Whereas most people needed to size up in v1, v2 is closer to true to size, but people who are typically between sizes may want to size up, especially for longer distances. The wider midfoot in the men's version of v2 may create some foot translation issues for some, and men with a narrower midfoot may prefer the women's last. I liked the fit of v1, but I prefer the fit of v2 due to the wider toe box and small increase in length.

PERFORMANCE

Matt: The Mizuno Wave Rebellion Pro 2 is a super racing shoe with an aggressive geometry. The apex of the bevel has been moved into the forefoot and this is immediately noticeable. It almost feels like there is no heel and instead there is a big bump pushing into your midfoot. Landing at the rearfoot is uncomfortable and feels like that bumps jams into your foot (think 3-4 times more intense than Skechers M-Strike ever got to). Warming up in this shoe was a little rough until I figured out where to land. Once you start landing a little farther forward, the sensation transitions from a speed bump to trampoline feeling. Once you hit the right spot, the Rebellion Pro 2 does feel lighter than its predecessor despite the same listed weight. The duel layers of Enerzy Lite+ and Enerzy Lite provide a really resilient and compliant ride, especially in the midfoot. This makes for a bouncier ride rather than a rolling one (unless you can land ahead of the midfoot).

The forefoot is a tiny bit firmer but transitions smoothly, especially at high speeds. The toe spring is actually fairly mild (classic Mizuno) but the forefoot rocker is large. There is no flexibility to the midsole thanks to the carbon-infused plate. The forefoot transition is smooth thanks to a rocker that starts right at the metatarsophalangeal joints. Due to the aggressive geometry, the Rebellion Pro does best at faster paces. The shoe feels a bit large and the increased foam compliance does not seem to respond best at all out paces. Instead, it worked best for me at 10k to half marathon paces or right around tempo and threshold efforts. Marathon pace and slower felt a little clunky for me as heel striker but getting the pace up over moderately long distances felt best. The longest I have used this shoe for is 12 miles and what I noticed most (outside of the sometimes awkward ride when I slowed down) was much this midsole kept my legs fresh. I am just getting back into long runs over 11-12 miles and was previously quite sore as I usually add workouts into those runs. Despite some blistering from the upper, I have not been sore after workouts/long runs with this shoe. This does give it the potential to be an excellent half to full marathon or long-run super shoe for those who land at the midfoot or forefoot and can optimize the fit. As a heel striker though, it felt better at moderate distance paces both due to the geometry and the upper.

The Rebellion Pro 2 is exclusively a road shoe. I would NOT suggest taking this shoe on anything but smooth surfaces as rocks could easily get stuck in the large central groove. The G3 rubber outsole does provide great traction on both dry and wet roads. I took these out in a recent light rain (in SoCal) and had no trouble turning on roads. Durability-wise the nubs and outsole rubber have remained intact despite 40 miles of hard use. Thus, I actually expect above-average durability out of these as long as you keep the Rebellion Pro 2 on appropriate surfaces.

Andrea: The Mizuno Wave Rebellion Pro 2 is the most natural feeling, leg saving super shoe I have tested, and I do not write something like that lightly. Readers of DOR know that I love the Vaporfly 3 for marathons and the Alphafly 1 for anything shorter, and while I know that those shoes make me faster at a given effort level, I have never experienced the reduction in leg soreness and fatigue after running in those shoes. The Wave Rebellion Pro 2 definitely increases my pace at a given effort, but I have also consistently noticed an improvement in how I feel immediately after a workout and in the following days. This is likely due to the combination of the high midsole stack height, aggressive heel bevel, and forefoot rocker that lines up with my MTPs.

The heel bevel makes it feel incredibly natural for me to land at my lateral midfoot, and the forefoot rocker starts late enough that I don't feel like I am unnaturally propelled into push off. The very high midsole stack in the midfoot also makes the shoe feel like it dampens vibration better as compared to the lower midsole stack of the Vaporfly or Alphafly. In most super shoes, the heel is the highest stack part of the shoe, so those who land further forward do not get the cushioning and vibration dampening benefits of the tallest part of the shoe. This is not the case in the Wave Rebellion Pro 2, in which the tallest part of the midsole is in the midfoot. Mizuno says that the shoe is designed for a more forward foot strike, and I completely agree with this statement. This really is the best super shoe I have tested for my landing pattern. Compared to v1, the more aggressive heel bevel in v2 makes it feel best at marathon pace or faster, whereas I can comfortably do a long easy run in v1. I have been able to use v2 for my warmups and cooldowns, it just doesn't feel like easy pace is what it is designed for (because it is not designed for easy pace).

I have tested the Wave Rebellion Pro 2 in a variety of workouts, including a 17 mile long run with 5 miles at marathon pace, and a few 10-12 mile workouts with intervals at half marathon and 10k paces. For me, the shoe feels best at half marathon to marathon pace because it feels like I am getting the most benefit out landing right at the apex of the heel bevel. This results in a cushioned (but not soft), propulsive ride that makes it feel easy to settle into a pace and keep turning over. Thanks to the carbon-infused nylon wave plate, the shoe is very stiff and feels highly oriented to forward motion. At 10k pace, it feels like I land forward of the apex of the heel bevel and the shoe starts to have more of a pogo stick feeling and like I am not getting the full benefit of the geometry of the shoe. Others may have different pace-related experiences in the shoe, partially depending where you land at various paces. Runners who typically land further back at marathon pace but further forward at 5k pace might find this shoe ideal for shorter races. The shoe feels light on foot and doesn't feel bottom heavy like other max stack height shoes. Even though the stated drop is 1.5mm, the shoe feels more like a 4-6mm drop shoe to me.

The G3 rubber outsole provides exceptional traction and I could actually feel it biting into the pavement when turning. I have tested the shoe on wet roads and had no issues with slipping. I have 50 miles on my pair and there is almost no visible wear on the outsole. I agree with Matt that this shoe is definitely only for paved roads, as I have gotten a few rocks stuck in the midline groove as well. I would expect excellent outsole durability from this shoe. The feel of the midsole has also not changed over 50 miles, so I am unsure how many miles the midsole will retain its cushioning and responsiveness.

STABILITY

Matt: The Mizuno Wave Rebellion Pro 2 is a neutral racing shoe. There are a few elements that add mild guidance to this shoe but it will still work best for those with neutral mechanics. The central groove does help keep the transitions feel a little more centered, compared to the medial collapse of the first version. The bevel in the rearfoot is posterior lateral, which combined with the groove does make for slight lateral guidance at the heel. I have been able to use this shoe up to 10-12 miles without too much issue, although I personally would want something a bit more stable over longer distances. The medial midfoot is filled in now but the width is still narrower compared to the rest of the shoe. There are mild sidewalls at the midfoot but these are fairly compliant due to being small and being made of Enerzy Lite+. The medial and lateral wings of the plate do add a bit more centricity to this shoe which prevents it from being unstable. The most stable part of this shoe is the forefoot due to the wider shape, sole flare, stiffness and central groove. Due to the compliant nature of the foam, the midfoot still feels fairly neutral while the forefoot and heel have mild but not intrusive guidance.

Andrea: The Mizuno Wave Rebellion Pro 2 is a neutral super shoe that is slightly more stable than v1. Mizuno filled in the cutout that was present in the medial midfoot of v1, which does result in a more centered feeling at initial contact and mid stance. The wider platform of v2, with greater sole flare both in the rearfoot and forefoot, further helps to center the foot through stance phase. The extreme heel bevel makes midfoot landings feel more natural than most other super shoes, which has made the Wave Rebellion Pro 2 line up nicely with my mechanics. The central groove also contributes to the shoe's centered ride. I did not feel like any feature of the shoe was controlling or forcing my foot medially or laterally. Overall, the shoe has a centered ride that feels highly geared towards forward motion. It is not a stability shoe, but the geometry updates may make the shoe feel slightly more stable than v1.

Thoughts as a DPT: Do Super Shoes Reduce Muscle Damage?
By Matthew Klein

Although many people who use super shoes often report decreased muscle soreness compared to traditional shoes after races and workouts, we are still unsure if they actually reduce muscle damage. Delayed onset muscle soreness refers to the muscular soreness that occurs in the hours and days after exercise. It is thought to be due to muscle damage and a variety biologic stimuli from disrupted muscle tissue (Kanda et al., 2013). Evidence has suggested that runners report reduced muscle soreness training in super shoes compared to traditional shoes (Matties et al., 2023).