Mizuno has had a banner year in 2024 with the release of the Wave Rebellion Pro 2 and Flash 2 at the beginning of the year. The extreme heel bevel and high stack height of these shoes made them particularly suited to those who land further forward like myself (Andrea) and quickly became my favorite long distance racing shoe (Pro 2) and performance trainer ( Flash 2 ). The Neo Vista has a large, but less aggressive heel bevel as compared to these two shoes, but still feels like a shoe that was actually designed with midfoot strikers in mind. Thanks to its light weight, responsive yet cushioned midsole, and rockered ride, the Neo Vista is another innovative shoe from Mizuno that has raised the bar for what a super trainer can be.

Mizuno Neo Vista
Price: $180 at Running Warehouse
Weight: 9.4 oz, 266 g (men's size 9), 7.8oz, 221 g (women's size 8)
Stack Height: 44.5 mm heel / 36.5 mm forefoot
Drop: 8mm
Shoe Purpose: Super Trainer

Pros: performs well at a range of paces, lightweight for a super trainer
Cons: high Achilles tab may cause skin irritation for some

RUNNING SHOE SUMMARY
The Mizuno Neo Vista is Mizuno's new super trainer, which features an extremely high stack of Mizuno ENERZY NXT foam, a nylon Mizuno Wave plate, and Mizuno's Smooth Speed Assist, which refers to the shoe's large heel bevel and forefoot rocker. In a market full of heavy super trainers that are limited in use by their weight, the Neo Vista is refreshingly light on foot, at 9.4oz for a men's 9 and 7.8oz for a women's 8. A large midsole cutout reduces weight and contributes to the shoe's compliance and resilience. The Mizuno Neo Vista is a super trainer that could be used for everything from recovery runs to workouts, and is a nice training complement to the Rebellion Pro 2 and Flash 2.

SIMILAR SHOES: a lighter version of New Balance SC Trainer v1
PAST MODEL: N/A

FIT
(To learn how a shoe should fit, check out our full podcast on fit by Matt Klein.)

Matt: The Mizuno Neo Vista fits me true to size in my normal men's US size 10. The upper features a full knit that provides somewhat of a sock like feel. The width is slightly snug with a lower volume and features a tapered but somewhat flexible toebox/forefoot. I have noticed quite a bit of pressure on my 5th toe from the logo, although this has decreased as the upper has broken in. This transitions into a slightly snug to normal fitting midfoot. The tongue is integrated with the upper but does fold in on itself when you tighten the laces. This has not caused me any trouble. The upper responds really well to adjustment from the laces. Slight caution is required as the tongue is thin and the laces can cause excessive pressure on the top of the foot. The heel fits normal to slightly snug. There is no heel counter outside of some mild reinforcements. There is no major heel collar padding. The upper and heel tab come up really high with an almost booty like construction. This was fine except that the stitching right at the Achilles tendon can cause some rubbing, so I would not recommend attempting to run sockless or use short socks with this shoe. The inner aspect of the upper is extremely comfortable against bare skin except for the stitching, so I would definitely recommend socks. The insole is removable, so those wanting to use other insoles or orthotics should be fine.

Typical Size: Men's US Size 10
Shoes that have fit Matt well: Saucony Guide 17, ASICS Kayano 30, Hoka Gaviota 5, Saucony Endorphin Elite, Nike Ultrafly
Shoes that have fit snug: Hoka Arahi 7, Saucony Kinvara 14
Shoes that have fit large: Salomon S/Lab Phantasm 2, Altra Timp 5

Andrea: The Mizuno Neo Vista fits 1/2 size small for me, similar to the Wave Rebellion Pro 2 and Flash 2. I requested and received a 1/2 size up for the Neo Vista, so I tested a women's 10 instead of my usual 9.5. This fit perfectly both in length and width, with a full thumb's width from the front of my big toe to the end of the shoe, and comfortable width in the forefoot that I never experienced any irritation of my 1st or 5th MTPs. The width of the midfoot and rearfoot are normal to slightly wide, but I did not feel like they were loose. The sock-like upper surprised me in its overall security, as they can sometimes be a little too sock like and not have enough structure to lock down my feet. The shoe was easy to lockdown without any mid-run lace adjustments. When I first tried the shoe on, I was concerned about the high Achilles tab causing blisters, and I wondered if I would need to wear tall socks. Matt assured me that he did not need to on his first run, and I was happy to find that I could wear my normal ankle height socks without any chafing on my Achilles.

The only time I felt the Achilles tab when running was on a 1 mile long steep descent, but as soon as I got onto flatter roads, I had no further issues (and no skin irritation at the end of the run). The tongue is a continuation of the 1 piece upper and while it did fold over when I tightened the laces, I did not experience any irritation on the dorsum on my foot. The flat laces are easy to lock down and are threaded through a continuous structure that looks like a more robust version of the SC Elite v3 lacing system. There is no true heel counter, but there are two ovals of stiffer material on either side of the heel that does create some noticeable structure and heel hold.

Andrea's Typical Size: Women's US Size 9.5
Shoes that have fit Andrea well: New Balance Beacon v3, Brooks Hyperion Max, Topo Cyclone 2, Nike Vaporfly 3, Altra Via Olympus 2
Shoes that have fit snug: Saucony Kinvara 14 (length and toe box width), Altra FWD Experience (length and width), Hoka Cielo Road (toe box width), Saucony Endorphin Speed and Pro 1-3 (length)
Shoes that have fit large: Adidas Boston 12 (length), Adidas Adios 8 (length)

Doctors of Running Checklist

Is This a Good Shoe for Walking: No
Is This a Good Shoe for Standing: No
Is the Forefoot Flexible: No
How Flexible is the Shoe: Not Flexible
Is This a Good Heel Bevel: Yes
Recommended for Haglunds: Yes
Recommended for Sockless: No
Durability Expectation: Above Average

PERFORMANCE

Matt: The Mizuno Neo Vista is a super training shoe with an incredibly bouncy ride and versatility across a wide range of paces. The midsole is made up of a huge amount of ENERZY NXT with a full length wave plate. This makes for an incredibly bouncy ride with an easy transition no matter what pace. I have used this shoe for every type of run, including easy runs, a long run, a tempo run and hard 2 min intervals. It has done well at all of them and even handled going down to low 5 min per mile pace. This would not be my top choice for shorter races but based on the comfort and ability to handle a variety of paces, may be an excellent choice for many for a marathon (or beyond). The shoe feels lighter than the listed weight, which may be partially due to the incredibly resilient and compliant midsole. There is an 8mm drop, although it feels slightly less due to the compression of the midsole and the rocker. The heel features a large bevel that is slightly posterior lateral. This facilitates landings well and I feel like my contact point is more forward.

The midfoot features a stable and smooth transition. The forefoot features an early rocker and the plate doesn't feel too stiff. The transition off the front is smooth regardless of pace as the shoe bounces you forward. The outsole is continuous with a central groove that facilitates the foot toward the middle. The traction is good on dry smooth surfaces, but slips a tiny but on wet road. This is not a shoe for anything but road as large rocks can easily get stuck in the groove. However, the durability is excellent from both the midsole and outsole. I have 30 miles on my pair with no wear on the outsole and full maintenance of the midsole resiliency. I expect a high number of miles out of these, so Andrea and I will be working toward getting 100 miles to follow up on that.

Andrea: The Mizuno Neo Vista has really impressed me with its versatility. I typically find super trainers to only work at easy paces for me, typically due to their weight. The lighter weight and more responsive Neo Vista performed well for me at paces ranging from a recovery jog to threshold pace. One of my runs in the shoe was a point to point 12 mile run at about 45 seconds slower than marathon pace that had a significant net downhill and was entirely on crowned roads. I knew this would be a good test of the upper's stability due to the distance and road quality. My feet were incredibly comfortable in the shoe, and did not develop the hot spots one would normally expect if an upper does not provide secure enough lock down. Even on severely crowned roads, my feet did not feel like they were sliding to the side at all. I would definitely use the shoe on future longer runs based on this experience.

The ENERZY NXT midsole in combination with the nylon plate and large midsole cutout provides a cushioned and responsive ride. It feels like the cutout contributes to greater midsole compliance by allowing the foam to spread medially and laterally with loading. The feeling of compliance also increased as I increased my pace. At recovery paces, the shoe felt pleasantly cushioned and protective, without feeling excessively springy while running slowly. As I picked up the pace to threshold during some pickups, the midsole felt more responsive and like I was getting greater propulsion at push off. The shoe feels like less than its stated 8mm drop due to the large heel bevel and compliant midsole. While the heel bevel is nowhere near as extreme as the Rebellion Flash 2 or Pro 2, it does make the shoe feel better tuned for midfoot landings. The forefoot rocker starts late enough that it does not feel like it forces me into push off too early. The large cutout is placed centrally in the rearfoot, but is placed further lateral in the forefoot. This made it feel like the shoe was helping me load my 1st MTP more easily, which is a feature I appreciate in running shoes.

All of my runs in the shoe have been on wet roads, and the full rubber coverage outsole (minus the cutout) provided exceptional traction, even when running on a steep downhill. The outsole shows no visible wear after 30 miles of testing, so I would expect higher than average durability from the outsole. I also did not have any issues with rocks getting stuck in the cutout because it is so wide (although there is a narrower spot in the midfoot part that could collect rocks).

STABILITY
(Learn more about stability in our full guide)

Matt: The Mizuno Neo Vista is borderline stable neutral, but still on the neutral side. It features a wide base, sole flare, a wider midfoot, a well-rockered geometry and a guidance line throughout the length of the shoe. The wider base is immediately noticeable, which combined with the sole flare and central groove make for a centered ride. The midfoot is wide, making it inherently stable. The rocker geometry consistently facilitates forward motion with the slightly posterior lateral heel bevel and early forefoot rocker. There are no sidewalls for those who are sensitive to them as Mizuno opted to utilize other methods. The true guidance happens in the forefoot, where the central groove points lateral and the medial side is filled in. This provides a mild laterally guided forefoot, compared to a centered heel and midfoot. This is not major but has been helpful for someone like me who needs mild forefoot stability/guidance. The only thing that detracts from the stability is how soft and bouncy the sole is. This makes it more guided for those with guidance needs at the foot but not as much for the hip. Rockered shoes shift stability needs higher up the chain so as long as you have stable hips, this is a stable neutral shoe.

Andrea: The Mizuno Neo Vista qualifies as a stable neutral shoe for me. The wide base, sole flare in the rearfoot and forefoot, large midsole cutout, and rocker geometry create a balanced, centered ride without forcing motion in any particular direction. I was particularly impressed by how stable the shoe feels on crowned roads, which is likely partially due to the large midsole cutout, which may allow the shoe to adapt to uneven road surfaces more easily than shoes without a cutout. One does not typically use the word adaptable to a shoe with a 44.5mm heel stack height, but this shoe adapts to road surface and pace better than any other super trainer I've tested. The secure fit of the upper, which is also impressive due to its one piece, sock like construction, impressively provides secure lock down. Mizuno has done an exceptional job with its use of non-traditional stability methods to give this shoe a centered and adaptable ride.

Thoughts as a DPT: The Impact of Bouncy Rockered Shoes on the Calf and Achilles Tendon
By Matthew Klein

The calf muscles function as the primary propulsive muscles during normal running speeds (Hamner et al., 2010). The Achilles tendon functions as an extension of the calf muscles, storing energy during impact and facilitating its release during the propulsive phase of running. While plates serve to stabilize the softer materials and facilitate motion, the new softer, highly resilient super foams act in a similar way to the Achilles tendon, absorbing force on impact and releasing a certain percentage (never 100%) back during propulsion (Agresta et al., 2022). Combined with the more extreme rocker geometries that reduce stress at the ankle and shift activity up to the hip and knee, these true super trainers may reduce tensile stress and force production requirements at the ankle, calf and Achilles (Agresta et al., 2022; Sobhani et al., 2017). So those with healing calf irritations or Achilles issues may benefit from a shoe like this, at least acutely or part-time.