While still a relatively young series, the FuelCell Rebel line has garnered a following similar to the Hoka Mach and Saucony Kinvara. The popularity of simple, moderate stack height, light, performance trainers continues to stay high despite every increasing footwear complexity and stack heights. The newest Rebel reverses course from the narrow platform of v3, featuring a wide, inherently stable base. This fairly large change comes with maintenance of the incredibly low weight thanks to a brand new PEBA-based FuelCell midsole. This additional takes the Rebel series to new heights, adding faster workouts and races to its already versatile ride.

New Balance FuelCell Rebel v4
Price: $139.95 at Running Warehouse
Weight: 7.4 oz, 210 g (men's size 9), 6.3oz, 179g (women's size 8)
Stack Height: 34 mm / 28 mm
Drop: 6 mm
Shoe Purpose: Performance/Lightweight Trainer OR Non-Plated Racing Shoe

Pros: Versatile Ride, New PEBA Base Midsole, Inherently Stable Base, Same Lightweight Ride, Wider Fit
Cons: Early Wear On Exposed Sections of FuelCell Outsole, Insole Folds on Itself Easily

RUNNING SHOE SUMMARY

The New Balance FuelCell Rebel v4 is the PEBA-based update to the popular lightweight performance trainer. Featuring a brand new PEBA version of FuelCell, the ride becomes faster and bouncier than ever. A new wider upper/forefoot sits up top while a secure midfoot and heel keep the platform locked to the foot no matter what the pace. Version 4 features a new geometry with a wider midfoot that makes for a surprisingly stable ride. The incredibly lightweight for a performance trainer is maintained, which combined with the new midsole creates a shoe that can handle daily training to racing for those who do not want or do well with plated super shoes.

SIMILAR SHOES: Hoka Mach 6, Saucony Kinvara 14
PAST MODEL: New Balance FuelCell Rebel v3

FIT
(To learn how a shoe should fit, check out our full podcast on fit by Matt Klein.)

Matt: The New Balance FuelCell Rebel v4 fits me true to size if slightly short in my normal Men's US size 10. The upper is an engineered mesh that fits wider in the forefoot and normal in the heel. The forefoot is rounded, although the slightly short fit comes from the fairly large toe spring that caused some mild pressure on my largest toe while standing. While running I have not noticed this at all over longer miles, likely due to how thin the translucent upper is. This transitions into a normal-width forefoot with a thin gusseted tongue. The laces are slightly thicker and fortunately do not need to be tied that tight for a secure fit. The heel fits normal to slightly snug with a low to moderate amount of heel collar cushioning. There is a moderately flexible heel counter that did not bother me but with the low level of padding may be troublesome for those with extremely sensitive heels. The security is good and I did not have to lace lock the heel. I would not suggest sockless running as the inner aspect of the upper is a little scratchy. Additionally, the insole can slip and fold on itself if you are wearing socks with traction on the bottom or going sockless. Thus I would suggest normal socks with this shoe and making sure to flatten down the insole when you take the shoe off.

Typical Size: Men's US Size 10
Shoes that have fit Matt well: Saucony Guide 17, ASICS Kayano 30, Hoka Gaviota 5, Saucony Endorphin Elite, Nike Ultrafly
Shoes that have fit snug: Hoka Arahi 7, Saucony Kinvara 14
Shoes that have fit large: Salomon S/Lab Phantasm 2, Altra Timp 5

Andrea: The New Balance FuelCell Rebel v4 fits slightly short in my usual women's 9.5, but not enough that I would go up 1/2 size. The toe box has ample width and is almost reminiscent of the toe box width of the Beacon v3. The midfoot is normal to slightly wide and the rearfoot is normal width and fits securely thanks to a semi-rigid heel counter and a small amount of internal padding. The gusseted, thin tongue provides a secure wrap around the dorsum of the foot and is further held in place by a lace loop. Due to the wider midfoot, I did have to tie the laces a little tighter than I normally do, but once I got the laces dialed, I had no issues with lockdown. The engineered mesh upper is comfortable and did not create any hot spots on my feet, even where the mesh creases over the dorsum of my toes. I was happy with the fit of the Rebel v4 and had zero fit related discomfort during my test runs.

Andrea's Typical Size: Women's US Size 9.5
Shoes that have fit Andrea well: New Balance Beacon v3, Brooks Hyperion Max, Topo Cyclone 2, Nike Vaporfly 3, Altra Via Olympus 2
Shoes that have fit snug: Saucony Kinvara 14 (length and toe box width), Altra FWD Experience (length and width), Hoka Cielo Road (toe box width), Saucony Endorphin Speed and Pro 1-3 (length)
Shoes that have fit large: Adidas Boston 12 (length), Adidas Adios 8 (length)

Doctors of Running Checklist

Is This a Good Shoe for Walking: Yes
Is This a Good Shoe for Standing: Yes
Is the Forefoot Flexible: Somewhat
How Flexible is the Shoe: Somewhat
Is This a Good Heel Bevel: Yes
Recommended for Haglunds: Maybe
Recommended for Sockless: No
Durability Expectation: Average

PERFORMANCE

Matt: The FuelCell Rebel v4 is a versatile lightweight performance trainer. The midsole is a new PEBA blend of FuelCell with a bouncy but not unstable ride. There is no plate in the shoe and the forefoot has some moderate flexibility. The 7.4 oz weight (men's size 9) is immediately noticeable and combined with the softer sole and great geometry make this shoe feel especially light. The heel features a good bevel with a small central groove that allows for noticeable separate compression of the lateral aspect of the sole. This transitions into a wider and stable midfoot. The lack of a plate keeps the entire transition easy unless you pick up the pace. The forefoot has an early rocker, a large rocker and the lack of a plate allows for an easy transition with the aforementioned flexibility. This makes for a fairly rockered shoe that rolls and bounces with control. The cushioning, with a 34 mm / 28 mm stack height, provides plenty of protection without being mushy.

The FuelCell foam feels comfortable at easier efforts but comes to life more the faster you go. I have used this shoe for a long run, easy runs, a tempo run, hard intervals and the Rebel v4 has done well with all of them. It is not the fastest shoe but can certainly still move. I found this to be a great alternative to plated shoes when I did not want as much stiffness, wanted a super foam but still wanted my legs to work a little. The speeds I hit made me completely comfortable to use this shoe for anything on road. Those who do not respond well to plates will find this to also be an excellent racing shoe for a variety of distances from 10k and up. The outsole traction is fairly average and the amount of exposed FuelCell foam means this shoe should only be used on road surfaces. I have 30 miles on my pair with mild abrasion on the outsole rubber and significant wear on the exposed FuelCell foam. I expect to get an average number of miles out of these for a lightweight trainer if they are kept on smoother surfaces.

Andrea: The New Balance FuelCell Rebel v4 is a lightweight, bouncy, rockered performance trainer. I was excited to test v4 because I really enjoyed v3, but experienced discomfort just posterior to my 1st MTP because it felt like the shoe flexed behind the ball of my foot, resulting in medial arch pain. While v4 has significantly more longitudinal bending stiffness as compared to v3, I still felt like the shoe was flexing behind my 1st MTP, again causing medial arch pain. I also noticed that the rearfoot of the shoe felt lower than the forefoot at initial contact (like I was going to rock backwards, as if wearing a 90s strength shoe), which created a feeling of lag when transitioning from initial contact to mid stance. I land at my lateral midfoot, which corresponds to the narrower portion of the midfoot of the shoe. It seems that this occurs due to the interaction of the large heel bevel, early forefoot rocker, and lack of rubber outsole coverage at my point of initial contact. I thought that the lagging sensation would be reduced at faster paces, but it was just as noticeable at threshold pace or even during strides as it was at easy paces. This was disappointing, because otherwise I like the responsiveness and moderate compliance of the new PEBA FuelCell blend, as well as the comfortable fit. This isn't to say that I couldn't run in the shoe, but I felt like I was working harder to run any given pace in it, and the pain in my medial arch was annoying, but fortunately went away quickly after each run. Unfortunately, the Rebel v3 and now the Rebel v4 do not line up with my foot shape (short toes compared to total foot length) and mechanics (lateral midfoot strike). For those who do not have these issues, I think the Rebel v4 could be a great do it all shoe due to its light weight and responsive and protective midsole.

One of my test runs was in a downpour, and I had absolutely no issues with traction despite the lack of total rubber coverage. The mesh upper does not drain well, and after this run I poured a significant amount of water out of the shoes. The exposed midsole is already showing wear after 28 miles, but the rubber has minimal wear. The durability of the outsole will depend on a runner's individual mechanics.

STABILITY
(Learn more about stability in our full guide)

Matt: The FuelCell Rebel V4 is a stable neutral shoe thanks to solid execution of geometry (that we speak frequently about). The entire sole is wider with a large amount of medial and lateral sole flare in the heel and forefoot. The midfoot is extremely wide, which combined with mild sidewalls in the heel and midfoot make for a stable-feeling, non-intrusive shoe. This is despite the softer FuelCell foam, which is also balanced by the amount and strategic medial and lateral placements of the outsole rubber and small central groove in the heel that allows separate compression of the lateral heel. The geometry is well-rockered and makes for an easy transition forward. While there are not any crazy methods of stability, the wide midfoot and sole flare makes for a solidly centered ride that has worked well for me even over longer efforts.

Andrea: The FuelCell Rebel v4 is a stable neutral shoe from a general perspective, but it actually created instability for me personally. The wide base and large amount of sole flare in the rearfoot and forefoot create a stable platform the entire length of the shoe. The large heel bevel and forefoot rocker should promote forward motion, although for me the combination of the rocker geometry and narrow portion of the midfoot actually promoted rearward motion (rocking backwards after initial contact) as opposed to forward motion, which it is designed to do. This shoe may perform more like a stable neutral shoe for rearfoot strikers, and may feel less stable for midfoot strikers due to the factors discussed above.

Thoughts as a DPT: The Impact of Midfoot Width On Ride and Stability
By Matthew Klein

I (Matt Klein) frequently talk about midfoot sole width as it relates to stability and guidance. The joints of the midfoot have most of their motion in the frontal plane (actually more like the frontal diagonal plane as nothing in the foot is truly in a straight plane). While motion here is needed for shock absorption, a narrowed midfoot sole width can make the platform inherently unstable for those who need a little help controlling motion at this area. A wider platform is naturally more stable, just as sole flare provides resistance to motion. The wider platform also adds some degree of stiffness both side to side (frontal plane) due to the extra material present as well as in the sagittal plane (front to back). In some shoes, companies may be worried about adding too much midfoot stiffness as this can sometimes make shoes feel clunky. With stiffer, firmer type midsoles, this might be true. However, with a less dense, more compliant and resilient foam like the PEBA-based FuelCell foam, this is not always the case. What is interesting about the Rebel v4 is that the midfoot is the stiffest part of the shoe. Even when manually twisting the shoe, the midfoot retains its shape best. So the additional width does add stiffness, but that isn't always a bad thing. For those who want a faster stable neutral shoe, this shoe provides the necessary stiffness to provide some mild guidance over longer miles.