The Saucony Triumph series has long been a highly cushioned shoe for eating up miles. Version 20 and 21 were a significant departure for the series as it got lighter, snappier and faster. Once the Ride 17 moved to PWRRUN+ as the main midsole there was a great deal of overlap, which foreshadowed a potential change in direction for the series. Version 22 returns both similar and different from the bloodline of the Triumph. The highly cushioned, easier riding shoe returns featuring a full-length PWRRUN PB midsole that uses a blend specifically made for training, meaning it is distinct from the PWRRUN PB used in their Endorphin line. A new, thicker, wider and slightly higher volume upper sits up top, dramatically changing the fit. This results in a return to the highly cushioned and relaxed ride this series is known for, while being the first in this category to feature a midsole made up completely of a superfoam-type material.

Saucony Triumph 22
Price: $159.95 at Running Warehouse
Weight: 10.5 oz, 297 g (men's size 9), 9.0 oz, 255 g (women's size 8)
Stack Height: 40 mm / 30 mm
Drop: 10 mm
Shoe Purpose: Premium Neutral Daily Training Shoe

Pros: Slightly Wider Fitting, Superfoam Midsole, Controlled Bouncy Ride, Highly Durable
Cons: Heavier Than Previous, Firmer Than Expected

RUNNING SHOE SUMMARY

The Saucony Triumph 22 is a premium, neutral daily training shoe for those who want a superfoam underfoot for easy and long runs. A new premium upper provides a more relaxed fit with thicker material. A full length PWRRUN PB midsole provides a highly cushioned and protective ride tuned for easier and longer runs. As the first premium neutral daily training to feature an all-superfoam midsole, the Triumph 22 demonstrates that superfoams can also be tailored for daily training and easier efforts.

SIMILAR SHOES: Nike Invincible Run 3, ASICS Gel Nimbus 26, New Balance More v4
PAST MODEL: Saucony Triumph 21

FIT
(To learn how a shoe should fit, check out our full podcast on fit by Matt Klein.)

Matt: The Saucony Triumph 22 fits me true to size to slightly long in my normal men's US size 10. The upper is thicker throughout with a normal with a slightly higher volume throughout. The forefoot is normal with a little extra volume. This transitions into normal to slightly higher volume midfoot with a thick, gusseted tongue. The thickness of the upper offsets the slightly higher volume but I did have to tie down the laces a little to get a secure fit. This transitions into normal width heel with a ton of heel collar padding. As with most Triumphs, the heel counter is extremely stiff. There is enough padding in the rearfoot that I did not notice the stiff counter, but those who are sensitive to them may run into issues as this shoe breaks in. The security is good thanks to the thicker upper and gusseted tongue. I only had to tighten down the midfoot a little and had no other trouble. The upper is comfortable enough that some may be able to use this for sockless running. Due to the thicker toe guard, I would still encourage the use of socks.

Typical Size: Men's US Size 10
Shoes that have fit Matt well: Saucony Guide 17, ASICS Kayano 30, Hoka Gaviota 5, Saucony Endorphin Elite, Nike Ultrafly
Shoes that have fit snug: Hoka Arahi 7, Saucony Kinvara 14
Shoes that have fit large: Salomon S/Lab Phantasm 2, Altra Timp 5

Nathan: This shoe got an overhaul top to bottom, including the upper. When I saw that this shoe moved to PWRRUN PB (more on this later) I certainly expected the shoe to lose some weight. However, it is coming in slightly heavier than it's predecessor, which is likely mostly due to the changes in the upper. The change in weight will be discussed more in the "Performance" section, but it in no way worsened my experience in the shoe. This upper seems to be made with the concept of a premium daily trainer in mind. That means the heel and tongue have a high level of cushioning and the upper itself is relatively thick compared to the previous version. Additionally, the overall fit is more relaxed, and I found the model to fit a bit on the larger end, both in width and length. The heel cushioning makes it heel secure, but the midfoot area is a bit baggy, which continues into a wider and higher volume toe box. The shoe certainly fits a bit longer as well. For my uses of this shoe, which included daily mileage, recovery runs, and medium-long runs, neither the extra width or length were bothersome. However, if having to corner or pick up the pace, the upper would feel a bit insecure. It is just starting to get warmer here in Wisconsin, so I have not had any problems with the warmth of the upper despite it being a bit thicker. In all, this is a wider and longer fitting upper that is built for comfort. Despite the larger volume and length, I would personally not size down.

Typical Size: Men's US Size 9
Shoes that have fit Nathan well: Topo Phantom 3, Saucony Endorphin Speed 4, ASICS Novablast 4
Shoes that have fit snug: HOKA Mach 6, Puma Deviate 3, New Balance Rebel v3
Shoes that have fit large: Saucony Triumph 22, Brooks Launch 9 (length)

Doctors of Running Checklist

Is This a Good Shoe for Walking: Yes
Is This a Good Shoe for Standing: Yes
Is the Forefoot Flexible: Moderately
How Flexible is the Shoe: Moderately
Is This a Good Heel Bevel: Yes
Recommended for Haglunds: No
Recommended for Sockless: Maybe
Durability Expectation: Above Average

PERFORMANCE

Matt: The Saucony Triumph 22 is a maximally cushioned, superfoam premium daily training shoe. While there is full length PWRRUN PB in the midsole, it is a different blend/is tuned differently compared to other previous shoes. The midsole feels extremely cushioned and comfortable at easier paces. It has some bounce to it, but is slightly firmer that I would expect for being so cushioned. The material has some compliance but not much resilience, meaning there is cushioning but it is not responsive. The cushioning still feels incredibly plush, but is not mushy. The ride feels best at easier and longer consistent efforts. The higher weight is noticeable, which makes this shoe feel even more tuned to slower and comfortable paces. With the training focus of this foam, it has incredibly high durability. The foam has maintained its feel exactly over the 40 miles I have run in it. The thicker outsole does add to the slight firmness relative to how much foam there is and I have seen almost no wear after these miles even in my normal spot.

The heel features a large, centered bevel. This makes for fairly easy heel transitions as the lateral side does collapse more even though there is no lateral bevel. This transitions into a smooth midfoot. The forefoot is moderately stiff at first. This is due to relatively late forefoot rocker and the fact the Triumph 22 fits slightly long for me. This broke in after 15 miles and now feels fine. Despite the stack height, there is moderate-to-mild flexibility in the forefoot. The toe spring is not too high so those that need a shoe that keeps their toes relatively neutral but don't need the stiffest ride will do best. There is a 10mm drop although with the PWRRUN PB it feels close to 8 mm. Overall, the Saucony Triumph 22 has moved away from the nimble and fast version 21 back to being an easier cruiser.

Nathan: I'll just say it off the bat. This is the best-performing Triumph I've run in. I've tested every model since version 18, and though I overall would enjoy the experience, it was never a shoe that I went back to for more miles if I had free time. While there are major changes to this shoe, it still holds the DNA of this shoe that many people have grown to love while making improvements that I think most will welcome.

Here are the major changes to the underfoot experience. The first is the movement from PWRRUN+ to PWRRUN PB. I reached out to Saucony, and they confirmed that this blend of PB is different than what is used in the Endorphin Speed and Pro. I don't have details, but they said the focus was to make it more trainer-ready concerning durability and cushioning. The second major change underfoot is the width of the platform, getting about 0.5 inches wider in the rearfoot and midfoot, and 0.25 inches wider in the forefoot. They also seemed to have slightly increased the heel bevel.

These changes result in a plush and balanced ride. The degree of softness was extremely evident upon first step in and continued during the running experience. Despite the weight increasing less than 0.5oz, I felt that this model ran lighter than its predecessor. Additionally, the move to a trainer-specific PWRRUN PB made it feel softer yet responsive. I have been a fan of PWRRUN+ due to its proven durability, but always found it hard to run slow because I found it too firm at slow paces and only gave good responsiveness at faster paces, which wasn't the intended purpose of the shoe. I think the new cushioning, wider platform, and improved heel bevel allow this shoe to perform as it shoe, a comfortable and balanced cruiser that can eat up miles for long runs. I think it has some degree of versatility that the previous models did as well, but just slightly less given the state of the upper.

As I mentioned, one of the things I loved about the previous models was the lab and real-world tested durability of PWRRUN+, which the Saucony team talked to us about on one of our podcast episodes. This blend of PWRRUN PB is newer and does not have nearly the volume of testing that the previous models do. So although I have not experienced any concerns relating to durability so far (granted I have 35 miles), I think that will be a big question mark for those who are used to pounding hundreds (or thousands) of miles on their previous Triumphs. So far, the foam still feels fantastic and there is absolutely no wear on the outsole.

STABILITY
(Learn more about stability in our full guide)

Matt: The Saucony Triumph 22 is a neutral shoe. It does feature some mild guidance elements, including a wider sole and sidewalls. The medial and lateral sides of the heel feature large sidewalls that travel into the posterior heel. The sole is wide throughout the length of the shoe with more medial sole flaring in the heel and forefoot sole flaring in both directions. The midfoot is wider than previous, although is slightly tapered compared to the rest of the shoe. The plush ride of the shoe does keep it neutral. Those who need really mild heel guidance should be fine, but this is overall a neutral shoe.

Nathan: The Triumph 22 gets a bit softer, which at times can decrease the stability of a model. However, I've actually found that this model seems more stable than previous ones. This is likely due to how they countered the softened foam with a significantly wider midfoot and rearfoot. Additionally, the improved bevel makes the transitions smoother. Finally, there are both increased sidewalls and wrapping up of the insole, adding just a touch more structure. Given the stack of the shoe and how plush it is, I'm not ready to say that it is stable neutral, but it is a solid neutral trainer without any instability for me.

Thoughts as a DPT: Foam Blends and Why The Same "Foams" Feel Different
By Matthew Klein

For a long time, both we at Doctors of Running, other reviewers and many in the footwear industry have been using simple descriptions of the foams types being used in running shoes. "PEBA" vs "TPU" vs "EVA" are common names and comparisons we use. In today's footwear world, it is rare that any foam is actually just that. Most are blends of various forms or are tuned differently depending on the geometry and purpose of the shoe. It is for this reason and more that so many "PEBA" foams feel so different. They are in fact different both in their chemical make-up and their properties.